Mastering Transformers

The Journey from BERT to Large Language Models and
Stable Diffusion

Savaş Yıldırım
Meysam Asgari-Chenaghlu

Mastering Transformers
Copyright © 2024 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case
of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the information
presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without warranty, either express
or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt Publishing or its dealers and distributors, will be held liable
for any damages caused or alleged to have been caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies and
products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt Publishing cannot
guarantee the accuracy of this information.
Group Product Manager: Niranjan Naikwadi
Publishing Product Manager: Sanjana Gupta
Book Project Manager: Aparna Nair
Senior Editor: Gowri Rekha
Technical Editor: Rahul Limbachiya
Copy Editor: Safis Editing
Proofreader: Gowri Rekha
Indexer: Subalakshmi Govindhan
Production Designer: Prafulla Nikalje
DevRel Marketing Coordinator: Vinishka Kalra
First published: September 2021
Second edition: May 2024
Production reference: 1230524
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Grosvenor House
11 St Paul’s Square
Birmingham
B3 1RB, UK
ISBN 978-1-83763-378-4
www.packtpub.com

First of all, I would like to thank my wife, Aylin Oktay Yıldırım, for her continuous support, patience,
and encouragement throughout the long process of writing this book. I would also like to thank my
colleagues at Toronto Metropolitan University and Istanbul Bilgi University for their support.
– Savaş Yıldırım

I extend my deepest gratitude to my wife, Narjes, whose unwavering support, love, understanding,
and encouragement have been my guiding lights throughout this journey. I also want to express my
heartfelt appreciation to my father. Though he is no longer with us, his memory remains a source of
inspiration, guiding me through both the triumphs and challenges of life.
– Meysam Asgari-Chenaghlu

Contributors
About the authors
Savaş Yıldırım graduated from Istanbul Technical University’s Department of Computer Engineering
and holds a Ph.D. degree in NLP from Trakya University. Currently, he is an associate professor at
Istanbul Bilgi University, Turkey, and a visiting researcher at Ryerson University, Canada. He is a
proactive lecturer and researcher with more than 20 years of teaching experience in machine learning,
deep learning, and natural language processing (NLP). He has made significant contributions to the
Turkish NLP community by developing many open source software and resources. He also provides
comprehensive consultancy to AI companies on their R&D projects. In his spare time, he writes and
directs short films and enjoys practicing yoga.
Meysam Asgari-Chenaghlu earned his Ph.D. from the University of Tabriz and currently serves as
a staff AI researcher at ultimate.ai. With a focus on deep learning, AI, and NLP, he has successfully
completed numerous projects ranging from search engines to generative AI and large language models.
He has authored several research articles within the field, making significant contributions to the NLP
community through his published work.

About the reviewers
Shivani Modi is a data scientist with expertise in machine learning, deep learning, and NLP, holding
a master’s degree from Columbia University. Her five years of professional experience span IBM, SAP,
and C3 AI, where she has excelled in deploying scalable AI models across various sectors. At Konko AI,
Shivani spearheaded the development of tools for optimizing LLM selection and deployment. Shivani’s
dedication to mentoring and talent development, coupled with her hands-on experience in leading
complex projects, underscores her status as a thought leader in AI innovation. Her upcoming project
aims to revolutionize how developers utilize LLMs, ensuring their secure and efficient implementation.
Ved Upadhyay, a seasoned data science and AI professional, brings over 7 years of hands-on experience
in addressing enterprise-level challenges in deep learning. His expertise spans diverse industries,
including retail, e-commerce, pharmaceuticals, agrotech, and socio-tech, where he has successfully
implemented AI solutions. Currently a senior data scientist at Walmart, Ved leads multiple initiatives
focused on generative AI, customer targeting, customer propensity, and responsible AI. He earned his
master’s degree in data science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and also worked
as a deep learning researcher at IIIT Hyderabad in the past.

Table of Contents
Prefacexv

Part 1: Recent Developments in the Field,
Installations, and Hello World Applications

1
From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

3

Evolution of NLP approaches
Recalling traditional NLP approaches

4
7

Attention mechanism
Multi-head attention mechanisms

14
17

Language modeling and generation

9

Leveraging DL

9

Using TL with Transformers
22
Multimodal learning
24
Summary26
References27

Considering the word order with RNN models 10
LSTMs and gated recurrent units
12
Contextual word embeddings and TL
13

Overview of the
Transformer architecture

14

2
A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject
Technical requirements
30
Installing transformer with Anaconda 30
Installation on Linux
Installation on Windows
Installation on macOS

31
32
34

29

Installing TensorFlow, PyTorch, and
Transformer35
Installing and using Google Colab
36

Working with language models
and tokenizers

37

viii

Table of Contents

Working with
community-provided models
Working with
multimodal transformers
Working with benchmarks
and datasets
Important benchmarks
GLUE benchmark
SuperGLUE benchmark
XTREME benchmark
XGLUE benchmark
SQuAD benchmark

39

Accessing the datasets with an application
programming interface

47

42

Data manipulation using the
datasets library

51

Sorting, indexing, and shuffling
Caching and reusability
Dataset filter and map function
Processing data with the map function
Working with local files
Preparing a dataset for model training

51
52
53
53
54
55

44
44
45
46
46
46
47

Benchmarking for speed and memory 56
Summary61

Part 2: Transformer Models: From Autoencoders
to Autoregressive Models

3
Autoencoding Language Models

65

Technical requirements
BERT – one of the autoencoding
language models

65

ELECTRA87
DeBERTa87

66

BERT language model pretraining tasks
A deeper look into the BERT language model

66
67

Working with
tokenization algorithms

Autoencoding language model
training for any language
Sharing models with the community
Other autoencoding models

70
80
81

Introducing ALBERT
81
RoBERTa85

88

BPE90
WordPiece tokenization
91
Sentence piece tokenization
91
The tokenizers library
92

Summary98

Table of Contents

4
From Generative Models to Large Language Models

99

Technical requirements
An introduction to GLMs
Working with GLMs

111

99
100
102

GPT model family
102
Transformer-XL105
XLNet105

Working with text-to-text models

106

Multi-task learning with T5

106

Zero-Shot Text Generalization with T0
Another Denoising-Based
Seq2Seq Model – BART

112

GLM training
115
NLG using AR models
120
Summary122
References123

5
Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification
Technical requirements
Introduction to text classification
Fine-tuning a BERT model for
single-sentence binary classification
Training a classification model with
native PyTorch
Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class
classification with custom datasets

126
126
127
134
139

125

Fine-tuning the BERT model for
sentence-pair regression
145
Multilabel text classification
150
Utilizing run_glue.py to fine-tune
the models
156
Summary157
References157

6
Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification
Technical requirements
Introduction to token classification

159
160

Understanding NER
Understanding POS tagging
Understanding QA

161
162
163

Fine-tuning language models
for NER

164

159

Question answering using
token classification
172
Question answering for many tasks 180
Summary181

ix

x

Table of Contents

7
Text Representation

183

Technical requirements
Introduction to
sentence embeddings

184
184

RNN-based document embeddings
Transformer-based BERT embeddings
SBERT embeddings

Cross-encoder versus bi-encoder

185

Text clustering with Sentence-BERT 200

Benchmarking sentence
similarity models
Using BART for zero-shot learning
Semantic similarity experiment
with FLAIR
Average word embeddings

Topic modeling with BERTopic

187
190
193
196

197
197
197
203

Semantic search with SBERT
205
Instruction fine-tuned
embedding models
209
Summary211
Further reading
212

8
Boosting Model Performance

213

Technical requirements
Improving performance with
data augmentation

213

Boosting IMDB text classification
with augmentation

214

Character-level augmentation
Word-level augmentation
Sentence-level augmentation

214
215
216

Adapting the model to the domain 221
Optimizing the parameters
with HPO
228
Summary232

216

9
Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning
Technical requirements
Introduction to PEFT
Understanding Types of PEFT

233
234
235

Additive methods
Selective methods
Low-rank fine-tuning

235
236
236

Hands-on PEFT experiments

236

233
Fine-tuning a BERT checkpoint
with adapter tuning
Efficiently fine-tune FLAN-T5 for an
NLI task with Lora
Tuning with QLoRA

237
241
251

Summary252
References253

Table of Contents

Part 3: Advanced Topics

10
Large Language Models

257

Technical requirements
Why large language models?

257
258

Importance of reward function

259

The instruction-following ability of LLMs

262

Fine-tuning large language models 263
Summary269

11
Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

271

Technical requirements
Interpreting attention heads

272
272

Visualizing attention heads with exBERT
Multiscale visualization of attention heads
with BertViz
Understanding the inner parts of BERT with
probing classifiers

273
278

Explain the model decision

288

Interpret Transformers’ decision with LIME
Interpret Transformers’ decision with SHAP

289
293

Summary295

287

12
Working with Efficient Transformers
Technical requirements
Introduction to efficient, light,
and fast transformers
Implementation for model
size reduction

298
298
300

Working with DistilBERT for knowledge
distillation300
Pruning transformers
302
Quantization305

Working with efficient self-attention 306
Sparse attention with fixed patterns

307

297
Learnable patterns
Low-rank factorization, kernel methods,
and other approaches

321
326

Easier quantization
using bitsandbytes
326
Summary327
References327

xi

xii

Table of Contents

13
Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling
Technical requirements
Translation language modeling and
cross-lingual knowledge sharing
XLM and mBERT

329

330

Visualizing cross-lingual textual similarity

340

330
332

Cross-lingual classification
Cross-lingual zero-shot learning
Massive multilingual translation

344
349
352

Fine-tuning the performance of
multilingual models

354

mBERT332
XLM333

Cross-lingual similarity tasks

337

Cross-lingual text similarity

337

Summary357
References357

14
Serving Transformer Models
Technical requirements
FastAPI Transformer model serving
Dockerizing APIs
Faster Transformer model serving
using TFX

359
360
360
364
365

Load testing using Locust
368
Faster inference using ONNX
371
SageMaker inference
371
Summary373
Further reading
374

15
Model Tracking and Monitoring
Technical requirements
Tracking model metrics

375
376

Tracking model training with TensorBoard
Tracking model training live with W&B

376
379

375
Summary384
Further reading
384

Table of Contents

Part 4: Transformers beyond NLP

16
Vision Transformers
Technical requirements
Vision transformers
Image classification
using transformers

387
387
388
392

Semantic segmentation and object
detection using transformers
393
Visual prompt models
398
Summary401

17
Multimodal Generative Transformers
Technical requirements
Multimodal learning

403
404

Generative multimodal AI

405

Stable Diffusion for
text-to-image generation

405

403

Stable Diffusion in action
407
Music generation using MusicGen
409
Text-to-speech generation
using transformers
410
Summary411

18
Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series
Technical requirements
413
Understanding time series concepts 414
Transformers and time
series modeling
415

413

Summary421

Index423
Other Books You May Enjoy

436

xiii

Preface
Transformer-based language models have emerged as a cornerstone in the field of Natural Language
Processing (NLP), representing a paradigm shift. Their superior fine-tuning and zero-shot abilities
have proven to be faster and more precise, surpassing the performance of traditional machine learning
methods in various complex natural language tasks. This practical guide to NLP is a valuable resource
for developers, familiarizing them with the Transformers architecture.
This book offers clear, step-by-step explanations of crucial concepts, supplemented with practical
examples. We start with an easy-to-understand overview of the revolution in NLP. This includes a
basic understanding of relevant deep learning concepts and technologies, along with comprehensive
guidance on managing various NLP tasks.
This book is also highly beneficial for developers looking to broaden their understanding of multimodal
models and generative AI. Transformers are not only used for NLP tasks but are also increasingly
employed in computer vision tasks, signal processing, and many other areas. Besides NLP, there’s a
fast-growing area of multimodal learning and generative AI that’s been showing some exciting progress.
We’re talking about things such as GPT-4, Gemini, Claude, DALL-E, and Stable Diffusion-based
models here. If you’re a developer, it’s worth keeping an eye on these technologies to see how you can
best utilize them for your specific needs.

Who this book is for
This book is for generative AI and deep learning researchers; hands-on practitioners; and machine
learning/NLP teachers, educators, and their students who have a good command of programming
topics and knowledge in the fields of machine learning, multimodal learning, and artificial intelligence
and want to develop applications in the cutting-edge field of NLP.
You will have to know at least Python or another programming language, be familiar with machine
learning literature, and have a basic understanding of computer science, as this book covers the
practical aspects of NLP and generative AI.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, From Bag-of-Words to Transformers, will present a gentle and easy-to-understand introduction
to Transformers. Additionally, it will compare older methods, including non-deep learning and deep
learning models, such as CNNs, RNNs, and LSTMs for text, with Transformers.

xvi

Preface

Chapter 2, A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject, provides the first hands-on experiment for setting up
your environment. In this chapter, you will learn about all aspects of Transformers at an introductory
level. Installing tensorflow, pytorch, conda, transformers, and sentenceTransformers
libraries will be explained. Another section of this chapter will be dedicated to installing GPU versions
of related libraries. We will provide some hands-on code examples for you to start learning through
examples. You will write your first hello-world program with Transformers by loading communityprovided pre-trained language models.
Chapter 3, Autoencoding Language Models, covers how to use the encoder part of Transformer. You will
learn about the architecture of the BERT model and how to train/test autoencoding language models
such as BERT and ALBERT. You will understand the difference between the models and the objective
functions of the architectures. You will also learn how to share the models with the community and
also how to fine-tune other pre-trained language models shared by the community.
Chapter 4, From Generative Models to Large Language Models, covers a generative solution with
decoder-only Transformers and encoder-decoder models. In this chapter, you will see the details of
Generative Language Models (GLMs) and Large Language Models (LLMs). You will learn how to
pre-train any language model, such as Generated Pre-trained Transformer 2 (GPT-2), on your own
text and use it in various tasks, such as Natural Language Generation (NLG). You will understand
the basics of a Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) model, how to conduct a hands-on multitask
learning experiment with T5, and how to train a Multilingual T5 (mT5) model on your own Machine
Translation (MT) data. After finishing this chapter, you will have an understanding of GLMs and their
various use cases in text2text applications, such as summarization, paraphrasing, multitask learning,
zero-shot learning, and MT.
Chapter 5, Fine-Tuning Language Model for Text Classification, teaches you how to load a pre-trained
model for text classification and fine-tune a base model for any downstream text classification task,
such as sentiment analysis. You will work with well-known datasets, such as GLUE, as well as your own
datasets. You will also take advantage of the Trainer class of the transformers library, which handles
much of the complexity of the training and fine-tuning processes.
Chapter 6, Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification, covers how to solve token-wise
classification tasks such as named-entity recognition, part-of-speech tasks, and span prediction by
fine-tuning Transformer models. Token classification, one of the challenging topics in NLP, will
be implemented by fine-tuning (or creating from scratch) using the Trainer class of the Python
transformers library. NER, POS, and QA could be counted as token classification problems. GLUE and
community-provided datasets are used for quick prototyping. We will use shared models and datasets
to fine-tune the models for token classification problems. We will also discuss how to benchmark
token classification for evaluation.

Preface

Chapter 7, Text Representation, will look at how to represent text with a Transformer-based architecture
for a variety of NLP tasks. Text representation is another trivial task in modern NLP. Representing
sentences using various models such as the universal sentence encoder and siamese BERT (sentence
BERT) with additional libraries such as sentenceTransformers will be explained here. Datasets such
as MNLI and XNLI will be described, as well as benchmarking sentence representation models with
STSBenchmark will be explored. Few-/zero-shot learning using efficient sentence representation
will also be covered. Unsupervised tasks such as clustering using transfer learning will be presented.
Chapter 8, Boosting Model Performance, discusses many techniques for increasing vanilla fine-tuning
performance. In this chapter, we’ll explore how to boost the Transformers model beyond vanilla
training. Data augmentation, domain adaptation, and hyperparameter optimization are the main
topics for improving model performance.
Chapter 9, Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning, instead of fine-tuning all parameters of an LLM, we can
find a cheaper and more efficient way to fine-tune with LoRa-like advanced techniques. Although
fine-tuning pre-trained Transformer models is a very useful way to solve NLP tasks, vanilla fine-tuning
can be parameter inefficient in many ways. We can use an adapter such as LoRa to reduce the number
of parameters to be fine-tuned.
Chapter 10, Large Language Models, LLMs such as T5 and LLaMA are discussed in this chapter, with
fine-tuning and efficient inference as the main focus. The field of LLMs has made significant progress in
recent years with the development of models such as GPT-3 (175B), PaLM (540B), BLOOM (175B),
LlaMA (65B), Falcon (180B), and Mistral (7B). These models have shown impressive abilities in
various natural language tasks. It is challenging to cover such an important topic in a single chapter;
however, we will have already covered many aspects of the topic, particularly in Chapter 4. Moreover,
throughout the book, we will discuss the paradigm of neural language models and their training process.
Chapter 11, Explainable AI (XAI) for NLP, we discuss potential approaches with hands-on experiments.
It is very difficult for us to make sense of the decisions made by deep learning models during inference.
So, we need different ways to make sense of the decisions made by these black-box models. In this
chapter, we will see how to apply Explainable AI (XAI) approaches to NLP.
Chapter 12, Working with Efficient Transformers, as it is getting difficult to run large models under
limited computational capacity, it is important now to pre-train a smaller general-purpose language
model such as DistilBERT, which can then be fine-tuned with good performances on a wide variety
of problems like its non-distilled counterparts. Also, Transformer-based architectures face complexity
bottlenecks due to the quadratic complexity of the attention dot product in transformers and longcontext NLP tasks. Character-based language models, speech processing, and long documents are
among the long-context problems. In recent years, we have seen much progress in making self-attention
more efficient, such as Reformer, Performer, and Bird as solutions to its complexity.

xvii

xviii

Preface

Chapter 13, Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling, in this chapter, we discuss how to work
with more than one language. Architecture and models such as XLM will be described in this chapter.
Moving from uni-lingual to multilingual and cross-lingual language modeling will be explained. The
concept of knowledge sharing between languages will be presented, as well as the impact of byte-pair
encoding on tokenization in order to achieve better input. Cross-lingual sentence similarity using a
cross-lingual corpus (XNLI) will be detailed. Tasks such as cross-lingual classification and utilization of
cross-lingual sentence representation for training on one language and testing on another one will be
presented with concrete examples of real-life problems in NLP, such as multilingual intent classification.
Chapter 14, Serving Transformer Models, how to go to production is the key topic of this chapter. Like
any other real-life and modern solution, NLP-based solutions must be able to be served in a production
environment. However, metrics such as response time should be in mind while developing such
solutions. This chapter will detail how to serve a Transformer-based NLP solution in environments
where CPU/GPU is available. TensorFlow Extended (TFX) for machine learning deployment as
a solution will be described here. Also, other solutions for serving Transformers as APIs, such as
FastAPI, will be illustrated.
Chapter 15, Model Tracking and Monitoring, in this chapter, we need to monitor our model during
training to know where to stop and check whether there is a problem such as overfitting. We will
track our experiments by logging and monitoring using TensorBoard. It allows us to efficiently host,
track, and share our experiment results, such as tracking loss and accuracy metrics or projecting the
learned embeddings to a lower dimensional space.
Chapter 16, Vision Transformers, other than NLP, we can also work with images. Transformers achieved
great goals in the field of NLP, and as you will have seen in previous chapters, they can accomplish
many different tasks. In this chapter, Vision Transformer (ViT) is explained. Just like NLP, different
models have been created for the vision as well, and each single one of them created a new view of the
computer vision perspective. By reading this chapter, you will know how you can use models such as
ViT for computer vision tasks, how pretrained computer vision models based on Transformers work,
and how you can fine-tune them for specific tasks.
Chapter 17, Multimodal Generative Transformers, we can also work with all modalities in one model;
Text, Image, Audio, etc. Models such as CLIP show promising results in multimodal search (textimage). Other models and approaches, such as Stable Diffusion, perform very well in generating images
from textual prompts. In this chapter, we will look into these models and first create a semantic search
engine using CLIP. Next, you will learn how it is possible to create multimodal classifiers using CLIP
and cross-modal pretrained models. You will learn how to use Stable Diffusion and other related
pretrained prompt-based models, such as Midjourney. After that, you will learn how to create object
detection solutions with no training data using zero-shot prompt-based multimodal pretrained models.
Chapter 18, Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series, covers how to restructure a transformer
for time series tasks to leverage the benefits of Transformers. Transformers are well known for
NLP-specific tasks. Their main power comes from their capability to model time series data. This data
can be textual or non-textual. In this chapter, you will learn how to use transformers for time series
data modeling and predicting.

Preface

To get the most out of this book
Software/hardware covered in the book

Operating system requirements

Programming language: Python

Windows, macOS, or Linux

Libraries: transformers, PyTorch, peft, trl
Jupyter Notebook
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or access the
code from the book’s GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section). Doing so will help
you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.
Note
This book contains a few screenshots which have been captured to show the overview of workflows
and also the UI. Due to this, the content in this images may appear small at 100% zoom. Please
check out the PDF copy provided with the book to zoom in for clearer images.

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition. If there’s an update
to the code, it will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file
extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “Mount
the downloaded WebStorm-10*.dmg disk image file as another disk in
your system.”
A block of code is set as follows:
from transformers import pipeline
classifier = pipeline("zero-shot-classification",
model="facebook/bart-large-mnli")
sequence_to_classify = "I am going to france."
candidate_labels = ['travel', 'cooking', 'dancing']
classifier(sequence_to_classify, candidate_labels)

xix

xx

Preface

When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items
are set in bold:
tokenized_sentence = \
tokenizer.encode("Oh it works just fine")
tokenized_sentence.tokens
['[CLS]', 'oh', 'it', 'works', 'just', 'fine','[SEP]']

Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
conda create -n Transformer

Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance,
words in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: “Select System info from the
Administration panel.”
Tips or important notes
Appear like this.

Get in touch
Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at customercare@
packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.
Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please
visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would
be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you
are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.

Preface

Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read Mastering Transformers, we’d love to hear your thoughts! Please click here to go
straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.

xxi

xxii

Preface

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1.

Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781837633784
2.

Submit your proof of purchase

3.

That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

Part 1:
Recent Developments in the
Field, Installations, and
Hello World Applications

An introduction to the basics of Transformers is presented in this part of the book. Assistance will be
provided in developing your first ‘Hello World’ program using Transformers, installing the necessary
packages, utilizing pre-trained language models, and so forth. The corresponding code can be executed
with a CPU or a GPU. By delving into the practical work, this part sets the stage for tackling the
intricate challenges ahead.
This part has the following chapters:
• Chapter 1, From Bag-of-Words to Transformers
• Chapter 2, A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

1
From Bag-of-Words to
the Transformers
Over the past two decades, there have been significant advancements in the field of natural language
processing (NLP). We have gone through various paradigms and have now arrived at the era of the
Transformer architecture. These advancements have helped us represent words or sentences more
effectively in order to solve NLP tasks. On the other hand, different use cases of merging textual inputs
to other modalities, such as images, have emerged as well. Conversational artificial intelligence (AI)
has seen the dawn of a new era. Chatbots were developed that act like humans by answering questions,
describing concepts, and even solving mathematical equations step by step. All of these advancements
happened in a very short period. One of the enablers of this huge advancement, without a doubt, was
Transformer models.
Finding a cross-semantic understanding of different natural languages, natural languages and images,
natural languages, and programming languages, and even in a broader sense, natural languages and
almost any other modality, has opened a new gate for us to be able to use natural language as our
primary input to perform many complex tasks in the field of AI. The easiest imaginable way is to just
describe what we are looking for in a picture so the model will give us what we want (https://
huggingface.co/spaces/CVPR/regionclip-demo):

Figure 1.1 – Zero-shot object detection with the prompt “A yellow apple”

4

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

The models have developed this skill through a process of ongoing learning and improvement. At
first, distributional semantics and n-gram language models were traditionally utilized to understand
the meanings of words and documents for years. It has been seen that these approaches had several
limitations. On the other hand, with the rise of newer approaches for diffusing different modalities,
modern approaches for training language models, especially large language models (LLMs), enabled
many different use cases to come to life.
Classical deep learning (DL) architectures have significantly enhanced the performance of NLP tasks
and have overcome the limitations of traditional approaches. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs),
feed-forward neural networks (FFNNs), and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are some of
the widely used DL architectures for the solution. However, these models have also faced their own
challenges. Recently, the Transformer model became standard, eliminating all the shortcomings of
other models. It differed not only in solving a single monolingual task but also in the performance of
multilingual, multitasking tasks. These contributions have made transfer learning (TL) more viable
in NLP, which aims to make models reusable for different tasks or languages.
In this chapter, we will begin by examining the attention mechanism and provide a brief overview of
the Transformer architecture. We will also highlight the distinctions between Transformer models
and previous NLP models.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Evolution of NLP approaches
• Recalling traditional NLP approaches
• Leveraging DL
• Overview of the Transformer architecture
• Using TL with Transformers
• Multimodal learning

Evolution of NLP approaches
Let us discuss how NLP has evolved over the past two decades as significant advancements have
occurred in the field. Recently, the evolution has been primarily characterized by the transformative
Transformer architecture. This architecture did not emerge out of thin air but, rather, evolved from
various neural-based NLP approaches into an attention-based encoder-decoder architecture, which
continues to evolve. In the past decade, the Transformer architecture and its variants have gained
popularity due to the following developments:
• Contextual word embeddings thanks to self-attention
• Attention mechanisms, which overcome the problem of forcing input sentences to encode all
information into one context vector

Evolution of NLP approaches

• Better subword tokenization algorithms for handling unseen words or rare words
• Injecting additional memory tokens into sentences, such as the paragraph ID in Doc2vec
or a Classification ([CLS]) token in Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT)
• Parallelizable architectures that make for faster training and fine-tuning
• Model compression (distillation, quantization, and so on)
• TL capabilities: DL models can be easily adapted to new tasks or languages
• Cross-lingual, multilingual, and multitasking learning capabilities
• Multimodal training
For several years, traditional NLP approaches such as n-gram language models, TF-IDF-based
models, BM25 information retrieval models, and one-hot encoded document-term matrices have
been utilized to solve a range of NLP tasks, including sequence classification, language generation,
and machine translation. However, these traditional approaches have limitations, such as difficulty
in handling sparsity, rare words, and long-term dependencies. To address these challenges, we have
developed DL-based approaches such as RNN, CNN, and FFNN, as well as several variants.
A document vector created by the TF-IDF model would have a size of more than 30,000 features.
In 2013, word2vec, a two-layer FFNN word-encoder model, sorted out the dimensionality curse by
generating compact and dense representations of words called word embeddings. This early model
was able to create fast and efficient static word embeddings by converting unsupervised textual data
into supervised data (self-supervised learning) through the prediction of target words using nearby
neighboring words. Meanwhile, GloVe, another widely used and popular model, argued that countbased models can be better than neural models. It leverages both global and local statistics of a corpus
to learn embeddings based on word-word co-occurrence statistics.
Word embeddings have proven effective for some syntactic and semantic tasks, as demonstrated in
the following figure, which illustrates how the offsets between terms in the embeddings allow for
vector-oriented reasoning. For example, we can discern the generalization of gender relations, a
semantic relation, from the offset between the terms Man and Woman (Man -> Woman). Then, we
can arithmetically estimate the vector of Actress by adding the vector of the term Actor and the offset
calculated before. Likewise, we can learn the syntactic relationships, such as word plural forms. For
instance, if the vectors of Actor, Actors, and Actress are given, we can estimate the vector of Actresses:

5

6

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Figure 1.2 – Word embeddings offset for relationship extraction

The representativeness of word embeddings has become a fundamental component for DL models such
as RNNs or CNNs. The recurrent and convolutional architectures, respectively, started to be used as
encoders and decoders in sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) problems where each token is represented
with an embedding. The main challenge with these early models was polysemous words (words with
more than one meaning). The senses of the words are ignored since a single fixed representation is
assigned to each word, which is an especially severe problem for sentence semantics.
Pioneering neural network models such as Universal Language Model Fine-tuning (ULMFiT) and
Embeddings from Language Models (ELMo) were able to encode sentence-level information and
alleviate polysemy issues, unlike static word embeddings. In this way, we have a new concept called
contextual word embeddings.
The ULMFiT and ELMo approaches were based on LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory) networks, a
variant of RNN. They also exploited the concept of pre-training and fine-tuning, which allows for TL
by using pre-trained models trained on a general task with general textual datasets and fine-tuning
them on a target task with supervision. This was a significant development because TL, which had
previously been successful in image processing, was being applied for the first time in the field of NLP.
In the meantime, the idea of an attention mechanism (Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning
to Align and Translate. Bahdanau et al., 2015) made a strong impression in the NLP field and achieved
significant success, especially in seq2seq problems. Earlier methods would pass the last state (known
as a context vector or thought vector) obtained from the entire input sequence to the output sequence
without linking or elimination. Thanks to the attention mechanism, certain parts of the input can be
associated with certain parts of the output.

Recalling traditional NLP approaches

In 2017, the Transformer-based encoder-decoder model was introduced and found to be successful
due to its innovative use of the attention mechanism. The design is based on an FFNN by discarding
RNN recurrency and using only attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., Attention is All You Need,
2017). It overcame many difficulties that other approaches faced and has become a new paradigm.
Throughout this book, you will be exploring and understanding how Transformer-based models work.

Recalling traditional NLP approaches
Although traditional models will soon become obsolete, they can always shed light on innovative
designs. The most important of these is the distributional method, which is still used. Distributional
semantics is a theory that explains the meaning of a word by analyzing its distributional evidence rather
than relying on predefined dictionary definitions or other static resources. This approach suggests that
words that frequently occur in similar contexts tend to have similar meanings. For example, words
such as dog and cat often occur in similar contexts, suggesting that they may have related meanings.
The idea was first proposed by Zellig S. Harris in his work, Distributional Structure of Words, in 1954.
One of the benefits of using a distributional approach is that it allows researchers to track the semantic
evolution of words over time or across different domains or senses of words, which is a task that is
not possible using dictionary definitions alone.
For many years, traditional approaches to NLP have relied on Bag-of-Words (BoW) and n-gram
language models to understand words and sentences. BoW approaches, also known as vector space
models (VSMs), represent words and documents using one-hot encoding, a sparse representation
method. These one-hot encoding techniques have been used to solve a variety of NLP tasks, such
as text classification, word similarity, semantic relation extraction, and word-sense disambiguation.
On the other hand, n-gram language models assign probabilities to sequences of words, which can
be used to calculate the likelihood that a given sequence belongs to a corpus or to generate random
sequences based on a given corpus.
Along with these models, in order to assign importance to a term, the Term Frequency (TF) and the
Inverse Document Frequency (IDF) metrics are often used. IDF helps to reduce the weight of highfrequency words, such as stop words and functional words, which have little discriminatory power in
understanding the content of a document. The discriminatory power of a term also depends on the
domain – for example, a list of articles about DL is likely to have the word network in almost every
document. It would not be a surprise to see the term network in the domain data. The Document
Frequency (DF) of a word is calculated by counting the number of documents in which it appears,
and this can be used to scale down the weights of all terms. The TF is simply the raw count of a term
in a document.

7

8

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Some of the advantages and disadvantages of a TF-IDF-based BoW model are listed as follows:
Advantages

Disadvantages

• Easy to implement

• Dimensionality curse

• Human-interpretable results

• No solution for unseen words

• Domain adaptation

• Hardly captures semantic relations
(is-a, has-a, synonym)
• Ignores word order
• Slow for large vocabulary

Table 1.1 – Advantages and disadvantages of a TF-IDF BoW model

Using a BoW approach to represent a small sentence can be impractical because it involves representing
each word in the dictionary as a separate dimension in a vector, regardless of whether it appears in the
sentence or not. This can result in a high-dimensional vector with many zero cells, making it difficult
to work with and requiring a large amount of memory to store.
Latent semantic analysis (LSA) has been widely used to overcome the dimensionality problem of
the BoW model. It is a linear method that captures pairwise correlations between terms. LSA-based
probabilistic methods can still be considered as a single layer of hidden topic variables. However,
current DL models include multiple hidden layers, with billions of parameters. In addition to that,
Transformer-based models showed that they can discover latent representations much better than
such traditional models.
The traditional pipeline for NLP tasks begins with a series of preparation steps, such as tokenization,
stemming, noun phrase detection, chunking, and stop-word elimination. After these steps are
completed, a document-term matrix is constructed using a weighting schema, with TF-IDF being
the most popular choice. This matrix can then be used as input for various machine learning (ML)
pipelines, including sentiment analysis, document similarity, document clustering, and measuring the
relevancy score between a query and a document. Similarly, terms can be represented as a matrix and
used as input for token classification tasks, such as named entity recognition and semantic relation
extraction. The classification phase typically involves the application of supervised ML algorithms, such
as support vector machines (SVMs), random forests, logistic regression, naive Bayes, and multiple
learners (boosting or bagging).

Leveraging DL

Language modeling and generation
Traditional approaches to language generation tasks often rely on n-gram language models, also known
as Markov processes. These are stochastic models that estimate the probability of a word (event) based
on a subset of previous words. There are three main types of n-gram models: unigram, bigram, and
n-gram (generalized). Let us look at these in more detail:
• Unigram models assume that all words are independent and do not form a chain. The probability
of a word in a vocabulary is simply calculated by its frequency in the total word count.
• Bigram models, also known as first-order Markov processes, estimate the probability of a word
based on the previous word. This probability is calculated by the ratio of the joint probability
of two consecutive words to the probability of the first word.
• N-gram models, also known as N-order Markov processes, estimate the probability of a word
based on the previous n-1 words.
We have already discussed the paradigms underlying traditional NLP models in the Recalling traditional
NLP approaches subsection and provided a brief introduction. We will now move on to discuss how
neural language models have impacted the field of NLP and how they have addressed the limitations
of traditional models.

Leveraging DL
For decades, we have witnessed successful architectures, especially in word and sentence representation.
Neural network-based language models have been effective in addressing feature representation and
language modeling problems because they allow for the training of more advanced neural architectures
on large datasets, which enables the learning of compact, high-quality representations of language.
In 2013, the word2vec model introduced a simple and effective architecture for learning continuous
word representations that outperformed other models on a variety of syntactic and semantic language
tasks, such as sentiment analysis, paraphrase detection, and relation extraction. The low computational
complexity of word2vec has also contributed to its popularity. Due to the success of embedding methods,
word embedding representation has gained attraction and is now widely used in modern NLP models.
Word2vec and similar models learn word embeddings through the use of a prediction-based neural
architecture based on nearby word predictions. This approach differs from traditional BoW methods
that rely on count-based techniques for capturing distributional semantics. The authors of the GloVe
model have addressed the question of whether count-based or prediction-based methods are better for
distributional word representations and claimed that the two approaches are not significantly different.
FastText is another widely used model that incorporates subword information by representing each
word as a bag of character n-grams, with each n-gram represented by a constant vector. Words are then
represented as the sum of their sub-vectors, an idea first introduced by H. Schütze in 1993. This allows

9

10

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

FastText to compute word representations even for unseen words (or rare words) and learn the internal
structure of words, such as suffixes and affixes, which is particularly useful for morphologically rich
languages. Likewise, modern Transformer architectures exploit incorporating subword information
and use various subword tokenization methods, such as WordPiece, SentencePiece, or Byte-Pair
Encoding (BPE).
Let us quickly discuss popular RNN models.

Considering the word order with RNN models
Traditional BoW models do not consider word order because they treat all words as individual units
and place them in a basket. RNN models, on the other hand, learn the representation of each token
(word) by cumulatively incorporating the information of previous tokens, and the final token ultimately
provides the representation of the entire sentence.
Like other neural network models, RNN models process tokens produced by a tokenization algorithm
that breaks down raw text into atomic units, known as tokens. These tokens are then associated with
numeric vectors, called token embeddings, which are learned during training. Alternatively, we can
use well-known word-embedding algorithms, such as word2vec or FastText, to generate these token
embeddings in advance.
Here is a simple illustration of an RNN architecture for the sentence The cat is sad., where
x0 is the vector embeddings of the, x1 is the vector embeddings of cat, and so forth. Figure 1.3
illustrates an RNN being unfolded into a full deep neural network (DNN). Unfolding means that we
associate a layer to each word. For the The cat is sad. sequence, we take care of a sequence of
five tokens. The hidden state in each layer acts as the memory of the network and is shared between
the steps. It encodes information about what happened in all previous timesteps and in the current
timestep. This is represented in the following diagram:

Figure 1.3 – An RNN architecture

Leveraging DL

The following are some advantages of an RNN architecture:
• Variable-length input: The capacity to work on variable-length input, no matter the size of
the sentence being input. We can feed the network with sentences of 3 or 300 words without
changing the parameter.
• Caring about word order: It processes the sequence word by word in order, caring about the
word position.
• Suitable for working in various modes: We can train a machine translation model or sentiment
analysis using the same recurrency paradigm. Both architectures would be based on an RNN:
 One-to-many mode: RNN can be redesigned in a one-to-many model for language generation
or music generation. (e.g., a word -> its definition in a sentence)
 Many-to-one mode: It can be used for text classification or sentiment analysis (e.g., a sentence
as a list of words -> sentiment score)
 Many-to-many mode: The use of many-to-many models is to solve encoder-decoder problems
such as machine translation, question answering, and text summarization or Named Entity
Recognition (NER)-like sequence labeling problems
The disadvantages of an RNN architecture are listed here:
• Long-term dependency problem: When we process a very long document and try to link the
terms that are far from each other, we need to care about and encode all irrelevant other terms
between these terms.
• Prone to exploding or vanishing gradient problems: When working on long documents,
updating the weights of the very first words is a big deal, which makes a model untrainable
due to a vanishing gradient problem.
• Hard to apply parallelizable training: Parallelization breaks the main problem down into a
smaller problem and executes the solutions at the same time, but RNN follows a classic sequential
approach. Each layer strongly depends on previous layers, which makes parallelization impossible.
• The computation is slow as the sequence is long: An RNN could be very efficient for short text
problems. It processes longer documents very slowly, besides the long-term dependency problem.
Although an RNN can theoretically attend to the information many timesteps before, in the real
world, problems such as long documents and long-term dependencies are impossible to discover.
Long sequences are represented within many deep layers. These problems have been addressed by
many studies, some of which are outlined here:
• Hochreiter and Schmidhuber. Long Short-term Memory. 1997.
• Bengio et al. Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difficult. 1993.
• K. Cho et al. Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine
translation. 2014.

11

12

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

LSTMs and gated recurrent units
LSTM networks (Schmidhuber, 1997) and gated recurrent units (GRUs) (Cho, 2014) are types of RNNs
that are designed to address the problem of long-term dependencies. One key feature of LSTMs is the
use of a cell state, which is a horizontal sequence line located above the LSTM unit and controlled by
specialized gates that handle forget, insert, or update operations. The complex structure of an LSTM
is shown in the following diagram:

Figure 1.4 – An LSTM unit

The design is able to decide the following:
• What kind of information we will store in the cell state
• Which information will be forgotten or deleted
In the original RNN, in order to learn the state of any token, it recurrently processes the entire state
of previous tokens. Carrying entire information from earlier timesteps leads to vanishing gradient
problems, which makes the model untrainable. You can think of it this way: the difficulty of carrying
information increases exponentially with each step. For example, let’s say that carrying information
with the previous token is 2 units of difficulty; with the 2 previous tokens, it would be 4 units, and
with 10 previous tokens, it becomes 1,024 units of difficulty.

Leveraging DL

The gate mechanism in LSTM allows the architecture to skip some unrelated tokens at a certain timestep
or remember long-range states to learn the current token state. The GRU is similar to an LSTM in
many ways, the main difference being that a GRU does not use the cell state. Rather, the architecture
is simplified by transferring the functionality of the cell state to the hidden state, and it only includes
two gates: an update gate and a reset gate. The update gate determines how much information from
the previous and current timesteps will be pushed forward. This feature helps the model keep relevant
information from the past, which minimizes the risk of a vanishing gradient problem as well. The
reset gate detects the irrelevant data and makes the model forget it.
In a seq2seq pipeline with traditional RNNs, it was necessary to compress all the information into
a single representation in the input data. However, this can make it difficult for the output tokens
to focus on specific parts of the input tokens. Bahdanau’s attention mechanism was first applied to
RNNs and has shown to be effective in addressing this issue and has become a key concept in the
Transformer architecture. We will examine how the Transformer architecture uses attention in more
detail later in the book.

Contextual word embeddings and TL
Traditional word embeddings such as word2vec were important components of many neural language
understanding models. However, using these embeddings in a language modeling task would result in
the same representation for the word bank regardless of the context in which it appears. For example,
the word bank would have the same embedding whether it refers to a financial institution or side of
a river with traditional vectors. At this point, context is important for humans as well as machines to
understand the meaning of a word.
In this line, ELMo and ULMFiT were the pioneering models that achieved contextual word embeddings
and efficient TL in NLP. They got good results on a variety of language understanding tasks, such as
question answering, NER, relation extraction, and so forth. These contextual embeddings capture
both the meaning of a word and the context in which it appears. Unlike traditional word embeddings,
which use a static representation for each word, they use bi-directional LSTM to encode a word by
considering the entire sentence in which it appears.
They demonstrated that pre-trained word embeddings can be reused for other NLP tasks once the
pre-training has been completed. ULMFiT, in particular, was successful in applying TL to NLP tasks.
At that time, TL was already commonly used in computer vision, but existing NLP approaches still
required task-specific modifications and training from scratch. ULMFiT introduced an effective TL
method that can be applied to any NLP task and also demonstrated techniques for fine-tuning a
language model. The ULMFiT process consists of three stages. The first stage is the pre-training of
a general domain language model on a large corpus to capture general language features at different
layers. The second stage involves fine-tuning the pre-trained language model on a target task dataset
using discriminative fine-tuning to learn task-specific features. The final stage involves fine-tuning the
classifier on the target task with gradual unfreezing. This approach maintains low-level representations
while adapting to high-level ones.

13

14

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Now, we finally come to our main topic—Transformers!

Overview of the Transformer architecture
Transformer models have received immense interest because of their effectiveness in an enormous
range of NLP problems, from text classification to text generation. The attention mechanism is an
important part of these models and plays a very crucial role. Before Transformer models, the attention
mechanism was proposed as a helper for improving conventional DL models such as RNNs. To
understand Transformers and their impact on NLP, we will first study the attention mechanism.

Attention mechanism
The attention mechanism allowed for the creation of a more advanced model by connecting specific
tokens in the input sequence to specific tokens in the output sequence. For instance, suppose you
have the keyword phrase Canadian Government in the input sentence for an English-to-Turkish
translation task. In the output sentence, the Kanada Hükümeti tokens make strong connections
with the input phrase and establish a weaker connection with the remaining words in the input, as
illustrated in the following figure:

Figure 1.5 – Sketchy visualization of an attention mechanism

This mechanism makes models more successful in seq2seq tasks such as translation, question answering,
and text summarization.
One of the first variations of the attention mechanism was proposed by Bahdanau et al. (2015). This
mechanism is based on the fact that RNN-based models such as GRUs or LSTMs have an information
bottleneck on tasks such as neural machine translation (NMT). These encoder-decoder-based models
get the input in the form of a token ID and process it in a recurrent fashion (encoder). Afterward,
the processed intermediate representation is fed into another recurrent unit (decoder) to extract the

Overview of the Transformer architecture

results. This avalanche-like information is like a rolling ball that consumes all the information, and
rolling it out is hard for the decoder part because it does not see all the dependencies and only gets
the intermediate representation (context vector) as input.
To align this mechanism, Bahdanau proposed an attention mechanism to use weights on intermediate
hidden values. These weights align the amount of attention that a model must pay to the input in each
decoding step. Such wonderful guidance assists models in specific tasks such as NMT, which is a manyto-many task. Different attention mechanisms have been proposed with different improvements. Additive,
multiplicative, general, and dot-product attention appear within the family of these mechanisms. The
latter, which is a modified version with a scaling parameter, is noted as scaled dot-product attention.
This specific attention type is the foundation of Transformers models and is called a multi-head
attention mechanism. Additive attention is also what was introduced earlier as a notable change in
NMT tasks. You can see an overview of the different types of attention mechanisms here:
Name

Attention score function

Content-based attention
Additive
Location-based
General
Dot-product
Scaled dot-product
Table 1.2 – Types of attention mechanisms

In Table 1.2, h and s represent the hidden state and state itself, respectively, while W denotes the
weights specific to the attention mechanism.
Since attention mechanisms are not specific to NLP; they are also used in different use cases in various
fields, from computer vision to speech recognition. The following figure shows a visualization of a
multimodal approach trained for neural image captioning (K Xu et al., Show, Attend and Tell: Neural
Image Caption Generation with Visual Attention, 2015):

15

16

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Figure 1.6 – Attention in Computer Vision

Another example is as follows:

Figure 1.7 – Another example for Attention mechanism in computer vision

Next, let’s understand multi-head attention mechanisms.

Overview of the Transformer architecture

Multi-head attention mechanisms
The multi-head attention mechanism that is shown in the following diagram is an essential part of
the Transformer architecture:

Figure 1.8 – Multi-head attention mechanism

Before jumping into scaled dot-product attention mechanisms, it’s better to get a good understanding of
self-attention. Self-attention, as shown in Figure 1.8, is a basic form of a scaled self-attention mechanism.
This mechanism uses an input matrix and produces an attention score between various items
Q in Figure 1.9 is known as the query, K is known as the key, and V is noted as the value. Three
types of matrices shown as theta, phi, and g are multiplied by X before producing Q, K, and V. The
multiplied result between the query (Q) and key (K) yields an attention score matrix. This can also be
seen as a database where we use the query and keys in order to find out how various items are related
in terms of numeric evaluation. Multiplication of the attention score and the V matrix produces the
final result of this type of attention mechanism. The main reason for it being called self-attention is
because of its unified input X (Q, K, and V are computed from X). You can see all this depicted in the
following diagram:

17

18

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Figure 1.9 – Mathematical representation for the attention mechanism (diagram inspiration
from https://blogs.oracle.com/datascience/multi-head-self-attention-in-nlp)

A scaled dot-product attention mechanism is very similar to a self-attention (dot-product) mechanism
except it uses a scaling factor. The multi-head part, on the other hand, ensures the model can look
at various aspects of input at all levels. Transformer models attend to encoder annotations and the
hidden values from past layers. The architecture of the Transformer model does not have a recurrent
step-by-step flow; instead, it uses positional encoding to receive information about the position of
each token in the input sequence. The concatenated values of the embeddings (randomly initialized)
and the fixed values of positional encoding are the input fed into the layers in the first encoder part
and are propagated through the architecture, as illustrated in the following diagram:

Overview of the Transformer architecture

Figure 1.10 – A Transformer architecture

The positional information is obtained by evaluating sine and cosine waves at different frequencies.
An example of positional encoding is visualized in the following figure:

19

20

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Figure 1.11 – Positional encoding

A good example of performance for the Transformer architecture and the scaled dot-product attention
mechanism is given in the following figure:

Figure 1.12 – Attention mapping for Transformers

The word it refers to different entities in different contexts. As seen in Figure 1.12, it refers to cat.
If we changed angry to stale, it would refer to food. Another improvement made by using a
Transformer architecture is in parallelism. Conventional sequential recurrent models such as LSTMs
and GRUs do not have such capabilities because they process the input token by token. Feed-forward
layers, on the other hand, speed up a bit more because single matrix multiplication is far faster than a
recurrent unit. Stacks of multi-head attention layers gain a better understanding of complex sentences.

Overview of the Transformer architecture

On the decoder side of the attention mechanism, a very similar approach to the encoder is utilized
with small modifications. A multi-head attention mechanism is the same, but the output of the encoder
stack is also used. This encoding is given to each decoder stack in the second multi-head attention layer.
This little modification introduces the output of the encoder stack while decoding. This modification
lets the model be aware of the encoder output while decoding and, at the same time, helps it during
training to have a better gradient flow over various layers. The final softmax layer at the end of the
decoder layer is used to provide outputs for various use cases such as NMT, for which the original
Transformer architecture was introduced.
This architecture has two inputs, noted as inputs and outputs (shifted right). One is always present
(inputs) in both training and inference, while the other is just present in training and inference, which
is produced by the model. The reason we do not use model predictions in inference is to stop the model
from going too wrong by itself. But what does it mean? Imagine a neural translation model trying
to translate a sentence from English to French—at each step, it makes a prediction for a word, and it
uses that predicted word to predict the next one. But if it goes wrong at some step, all the subsequent
predictions will be wrong, too. To stop the model from going wrong like this, we provide the correct
words as a shifted-right version.
A visual example of a Transformer model is given in the following diagram. It shows a Transformer
model with two encoders and two decoder layers. The Add & Normalize layer from this diagram
adds and normalizes the input it takes from the Feed Forward layer:

Figure 1.13 – Transformer model (inspiration from http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-Transformer/)

21

22

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Another major improvement that is used by a Transformer-based architecture is based on a simple
universal text compression scheme to prevent unseen tokens on the input side. This approach, which
takes place by using different methods such as byte-pair encoding and sentence-piece encoding, improves
a Transformer’s performance in dealing with unseen tokens. It also guides the model when the model
encounters morphologically close tokens. Such tokens were unseen in the past and are rarely used
in the training, and yet, an inference might be seen. In some cases, chunks of it are seen in training;
the latter happens in the case of morphologically rich languages such as Turkish, German, Czech,
and Latvian. For example, a model might see the word training but not trainings. In such cases, it can
tokenize trainings as training+s. These two are commonly seen when we look at them as two parts.
Transformer-based models have quite common characteristics—for example, they are all based on
this original architecture with differences in the steps they use and don’t use. In some cases, minor
differences are made—for example, improvements to the multi-head attention mechanism taking place.
Now, we will discuss how to apply TL within Transformers in the following section.

Using TL with Transformers
TL is a field of AI that aims to make models reusable for different tasks—for example, a model trained
on a given task such as A is reusable (fine-tuning) on a different task such as B. In an NLP field, this
is achievable by using Transformer-like architectures that can capture the understanding of language
itself by language modeling. Such models are called language models—they provide a model for the
language they have been trained on. TL is not a new technique, and it has been used in various fields
such as computer vision. ResNet, Inception, Visual Geometry Group (VGG), and EfficientNet are
examples of such models that can be used as pre-trained models able to be fine-tuned on different
computer vision tasks.
Shallow TL using models such as Word2vec, GloVe, and Doc2vec is also possible in NLP. It is called
shallow because there is no model to be transferred behind this kind of TL and instead, the pre-trained
vectors for words/tokens are transferred. You can use these token- or document-embedding models
followed by a classifier or use them combined with other models such as RNNs instead of using
random embeddings.
TL in NLP using Transformer models is also possible because these models can learn a language itself
without any labeled data. Language modeling is a task used to train transferable weights for various
problems. Masked language modeling is one of the methods used to learn a language itself. As with
Word2vec’s window-based model for predicting center tokens, in masked language modeling, a
similar approach takes place but with key differences. Given a probability, each word is masked and
replaced with a special token such as [MASK]. The language model (a Transformer-based model, in
our case) must predict the masked words. Instead of using a window, unlike with Word2vec, a whole
sentence is given, and the output of the model must be the same sentence with masked words filled.

Using TL with Transformers

One of the first models that used the Transformer architecture for language modeling is BERT,
which is based on the encoder part of the Transformer architecture. Masked language modeling is
accomplished by BERT using the same method described before and after training a language model.
BERT is a transferable language model for different NLP tasks such as token classification, sequence
classification, or even question answering.
Each of these tasks is a fine-tuning task for BERT once a language model is trained. BERT is best known
for its key characteristics on the base Transformer encoder model, and by altering these characteristics,
different versions of it—small, tiny, base, large, and extra-large—are proposed. Contextual embedding
enables a model to have the correct meaning of each word based on the context in which it is given—for
example, the word cold can have different meanings in two different sentences: cold-hearted killer and
cold weather. The number of layers at the encoder part, the input dimension, the output embedding
dimension, and the number of multi-head attention mechanisms are key characteristics, as illustrated
in the following figure:

Figure 1.14 – Pre-training and fine-tuning procedures for BERT (image inspiration from J. Devlin
et al., Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional Transformers for language understanding, 2018)

As you can see in Figure 1.14, the pre-training phase also consists of another objective known as
next-sentence prediction. As we know, each document is composed of sentences followed by each
other, and another important part of training a model to grasp the language is to understand the
relationships of sentences to each other—in other words, whether they are related or not. To achieve
these tasks, BERT introduced special tokens such as [CLS] and [SEP]. A [CLS] token is an initially
meaningless token used as the starting token for all tasks, and it contains all information about the
sentence. In sequence-classification tasks such as next sentence prediction (NSP), a classifier on top
of the output of this token (output position of 0) is used. It is also useful in evaluating the sense of a
sentence or capturing its semantics—for example, when using a Siamese BERT model, comparing
these two [CLS] tokens for different sentences by a metric such as cosine similarity is very helpful.
On the other hand, [SEP] is used to distinguish between two sentences, and it is only used to separate
two sentences. After pre-training, if someone aims to fine-tune BERT on a sequence classification

23

24

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

task such as sentiment analysis, they will use a classifier on top of the output embedding of [CLS].
It is also notable that all TL models can be frozen during fine-tuning or freed; frozen means seeing
all weights and biases inside the model as constants and stopping training on them. In the example
of sentiment analysis, just the classifier will be trained, not the model if it is frozen.
In the next section, you will learn about multimodal learning. You will also get familiar with different
architectures that use this learning paradigm with respect to Transformers.

Multimodal learning
Multimodal learning is a general topic in AI that refers to solutions where the associated data is not in
a single modality (only image, only text, etc.) but instead, more than one modality is involved. As an
example, consider a problem where both an image and text are involved as input or output. Another
example can be a cross-modality problem where the input and output modalities are not the same.
Before jumping into multimodal learning using Transformers, it is useful to describe how they can be
used for images as well. Transformers get the input in the form of a sequence but, unlike text, images
are not 1D sequences. One of the approaches in this field tries to convert the image into patches. Each
patch is linearly projected into a vector shape and positional encoding is applied.
Figure 1.15 shows the architecture of the Vision Transformer (ViT) and how it works:

Figure 1.15 – Vision Transformer (https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/12/
transformers-for-image-recognition-at.html)

Multimodal learning

Like architectures such as BERT, a classification head can be applied for tasks such as image classification.
However, other use cases and applications can be drawn from this approach as well.
Using a Transformer for images or text separately can create a nice model that can understand text or
images. But if we want to have a model that can understand both at the same time and create a link
between text and images, it would require training both with constraints. Contrastive Language–
Image Pre-training (CLIP) is one of the models that can understand images and text. It can be used
for semantic search where the input can be a text/image and the output is a text/image.
The next figure shows how the CLIP model is trained by using a dual encoder:

Figure 1.16 – CLIP model contrastive pre-training (https://openai.com/blog/clip/)

As it is clear from the CLIP architecture, it will be very useful for zero-shot prediction for text and
image modalities. DALL-E and diffusion-based models such as Stable Diffusion are in this category.
The Stable Diffusion pipeline is shown in the next figure:

25

26

From Bag-of-Words to the Transformers

Figure 1.17 – Stable Diffusion pipeline

The preceding diagram can also be viewed at https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/
generative/generate_images_with_stable_diffusion, and the license is as
follows: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
For example, Stable Diffusion uses a text encoder to convert text into dense vectors, and, accordingly,
a diffusion model tries to create a vector representation of the respective image. The decoder tries
to decode this vector representation, and finally, an image with semantic similarity to the text input
is produced.
Multimodal learning not only helps us use different modalities for tasks that are always related to
image-text but it can also be used in many different modalities combined with text, such as speech,
numerical data, and graphs.

Summary
With this, we have reached the end of the chapter. You should now understand the evolution of NLP
methods and approaches, from BoW to Transformers. We looked at how to implement BoW, RNN, and
CNN-based approaches and understood what Word2vec is and how it helps improve the conventional
DL-based methods using shallow TL. We also investigated the foundation of the Transformer
architecture, with BERT as an example. We learned about TL and how it is utilized by BERT. We also
described the general idea behind multimodal learning and provided a quick introduction to ViT.
Models such as CLIP and Stable Diffusion were also described.
At this point, we have learned the basic information that is necessary to continue to the next chapters.
We understand the main idea behind Transformer-based architectures and how TL can be applied
using this architecture.

References

In the next chapter, we will see how it is possible to run a simple Transformer example from scratch.
The related information about the installation steps will be given, and working with datasets and
benchmarks will also be investigated in detail.

References
• Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word representations
in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
• Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. (2014). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473.
• Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D. (2014, October). GloVe: Global vectors for word
representation. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (EMNLP) (pp. 1532-1543).
• Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short-term memory. Neural computation,
9(8), 1735-1780.
• Bengio, Y., Simard, P, and Frasconi, P. (1994). Learning long-term dependencies with gradient
descent is difficult. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 5(2), 157-166.
• Cho, K., et al. (2014). Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical
machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078.
• Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional neural networks for sentence classification. CoRR abs/1408.5882
(2014). arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.5882.
• Vaswani, A., et al. (2017). Attention is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.03762.
• Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
Transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
• Alammar (2022). The Illustrated stable diffusion. https://jalammar.github.io/
illustrated-stable-diffusion/
• Zhong, Y., et al. (2022). Regionclip: Region-based language-image pretraining. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 16793-16803).
• Dosovitskiy, A., et al. (2020). An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929.
• Radford, A., et al. (2021, July). Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 8748-8763). PMLR.

27

2
A Hands-On Introduction
to the Subject
So far, we have had an overall look at the evolution of natural language processing (NLP) using deep
learning (DL)-based methods. We have learned some basic information about transformers and their
respective architecture. In this chapter, we are going to have a deeper look into how a transformer
model can be used. Tokenizers and models, such as bidirectional encoder representations from
transformer (BERT), will be described in more technical detail with hands-on examples, including
how to load a tokenizer/model and use community-provided pretrained models. However, before
using any specific model, we will understand the installation steps required to provide the necessary
environment by using Anaconda. In the installation steps, installing libraries and programs on various
operating systems such as Linux, Windows, and macOS will be covered. The installation of PyTorch
and TensorFlow, with two versions of a central processing unit (CPU) and a graphics processing
unit (GPU), is also shown. A quick jump into a Google Colaboratory (Google Colab) installation of
the transformer library is provided. There is also a section dedicated to using models in the PyTorch
and TensorFlow frameworks.
The Hugging Face models repository is also another important part of this chapter, in which finding
different models and steps to use various pipelines are discussed—for example, models such as
bidirectional and auto-regressive transformer (BART), BERT, and TAble PArSing (TAPAS) are
detailed, with a glance at generative pretrained transformer 2 (GPT-2) text generation. However,
this is purely an overview, and this part of the chapter relates to getting the environment ready and
using pretrained models. No model training is discussed here, as this is given greater significance in
upcoming chapters.
We first discuss how to use the Transformer library for inference by community-provided models;
then, we describe the datasets library and how to load various datasets and benchmarks and
use metrics. Cross-lingual datasets and how to use local files with the datasets library are also
considered here. With this chapter, we get the system ready for the rest of the book to develop your
own NLP pipeline with transformers.

30

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
• Installing transformer with Anaconda
• Working with language models and tokenizers
• Working with community-provided models
• Working with multimodal transformers
• Working with benchmarks and datasets
• Benchmarking for speed and memory

Technical requirements
You will need to install the libraries and software listed next. Although having the latest version is a
plus, it is mandatory to install versions that are compatible with each other. For more information
about the latest version installation for the Hugging Face transformer, take a look at their official web
page at https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/installation:
• Anaconda
• transformers 4.25.1
• pytorch 1.13.1
• tensorflow 2.9.2
• datasets 1.4.1
Finally, all the code shown in this chapter is available in this book’s GitHub repository at https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

Installing transformer with Anaconda
Anaconda is a distribution of the Python and R programming languages that makes package
distribution and deployment easy for scientific computation. In this section, we will describe the
installation of the Transformer library. However, it is also possible to install this library without
the aid of Anaconda. The main motivation for using Anaconda is to explain the process more easily
and moderate the packages used.
To start installing the related libraries, the installation of Anaconda is a mandatory step. The official
guidelines provided by the Anaconda documentation offer simple steps to install it for common
operating systems (macOS, Windows, and Linux).

Installing transformer with Anaconda

Let’s see how we can install it on different platforms in the next sub-sections.

Installation on Linux
Many Linux distributions are available for users to enjoy, but Ubuntu is one of the preferred ones. In
this section, the steps to install Anaconda are covered for Linux. Proceed as follows:
1.

Download the Anaconda installer for Linux from https://www.anaconda.com/
products/individual#Downloads and go to the Linux section, as illustrated in the
following screenshot:

Figure 2.1 – Anaconda download link for Linux

2.

Run a bash command to install it and complete the following steps:

3.

Open the Terminal and run the following command:
bash Terminal./FilePath/For/Anaconda.sh

4.

Press Enter to see the license agreement and press Q if you do not want to read it all, and then
do the following:

5.

Click Yes to agree.

6.

Click Yes for the installer to always initialize the conda root environment.

7.

After running a python command from the Terminal, you should see an Anaconda prompt
after the Python version information.

8.

You can access Anaconda Navigator by running an anaconda-navigator command
from the Terminal. As a result, you will see the Anaconda graphical user interface (GUI) start
loading the related modules, as shown in the following screenshot:

31

32

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Figure 2.2 – Anaconda Navigator

Let’s move on to the next section!

Installation on Windows
The following steps describe how you can install Anaconda on Windows operating systems:
1.

Download the installer from https://www.anaconda.com/products/
individual#Downloads and go to the Windows section, as illustrated in the
following screenshot:

Figure 2.3 – Anaconda download link for Windows

Installing transformer with Anaconda

2.

Open the installer and follow the guide by clicking the I Agree button.

3.

Select the location for installation, as illustrated in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.4 – Anaconda installer for Windows

Don’t forget to check the Add anaconda3 to my PATH environment variable checkbox, as
illustrated in the following screenshot. If you do not check this box, the Anaconda version of
Python will not be added to the Windows environment variables, and you will not be able to
directly run it with a python command from the Windows shell or the Windows command line:

Figure 2.5 – Anaconda installer advanced options

33

34

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

4.

Follow the rest of the installation instructions and finish the installation.

5.

You should now be able to start Anaconda Navigator from the Start menu.

Now that we know how to download and install it on Linux, let’s see how we can do it on macOS.

Installation on macOS
The following steps must be followed to install Anaconda on macOS:
1.

Download the installer from https://www.anaconda.com/products/
individual#Downloads and go to the macOS section, as illustrated in the
following screenshot:

Figure 2.6 – Anaconda download link for macOS

2.

Open the installer.

3.

Follow the instructions and click the Install button to install macOS in a predefined location,
as illustrated in the following screenshot. You can change the default directory, but this is
not recommended:

Figure 2.7 – Anaconda installer for macOS

Installing transformer with Anaconda

Once you finish the installation, you should be able to access Anaconda Navigator.

Installing TensorFlow, PyTorch, and Transformer
The installation of TensorFlow and PyTorch as two major libraries that are used for DL can be made
through pip or conda itself. conda provides a command-line interface (CLI) for the easier
installation of these libraries.
For a clean installation and to avoid interrupting other environments, it is better to create a conda
environment for the huggingface library. You can do this by running the following code:
conda create -n Transformer

This command will create an empty environment for installing other libraries. Once created, we will
need to activate it as follows:
conda activate Transformer

The installation of the Transformer library is easily done by running the following commands:
conda install -c conda-forge tensorflow
conda install -c conda-forge pytorch
conda install -c conda-forge transformers

The -c argument in the conda install command lets Anaconda use additional channels to
search for libraries.
Note that it is a requirement to have TensorFlow and PyTorch installed because the Transformer
library uses both of these libraries. An additional note is the easy handling of CPU and GPU versions
of TensorFlow by Conda. If you simply put –gpu after tensorflow, it will install the GPU version
automatically. For the installation of PyTorch through the cuda library (GPU version), you are required
to have related libraries such as cuda, but conda handles this automatically, and no further manual
setup or installation is required. The following screenshot shows how conda automatically takes care
of installing the PyTorch GPU version by installing the related cudatoolkit and cudnn libraries:

35

36

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Figure 2.8 – Conda installing PyTorch and related cuda libraries

Note that all of these installations can also be done without conda, but the reason behind using
Anaconda is its ease of use. In terms of using environments or installing GPU versions of TensorFlow
or PyTorch, Anaconda works like magic and is a good time saver.

Installing and using Google Colab
Even if the utilization of Anaconda saves time and is useful, in most cases, not everyone has such good
and reasonable computation resources available. Google Colab is a good alternative in such cases.
The installation of the Transformer library in Colab is carried out with the following command:
!pip install transformers

Working with language models and tokenizers

An exclamation mark before the statement makes the code run in a Colab shell, which is the equivalent
to running the code in the Terminal instead of running it using a Python interpreter. This will
automatically install the Transformer library.
We will see how to work with a BERT model and tokenizer.

Working with language models and tokenizers
In this section, we will look at using the Transformer library with language models, along with
their related tokenizers. In order to use any specified language model, we first need to import it. We
will start with the BERT model provided by Google and use its pretrained version, as follows:
from transformers import BertTokenizer
tokenizer = \
    BertTokenizer.from_pretrained('bert-base-uncased')

The first line of the preceding code snippet imports the BERT tokenizer, and the second line downloads
a pretrained tokenizer for the BERT base version. Note that the uncased version is trained with uncased
letters, so it does not matter whether the letters appear in upper- or lowercase. To test and see the
output, you must run the following line of code:
text = "Using Transformers is easy!"
tokenizer(text)

This will be the output:
{'input_ids': [101, 2478, 19081, 2003, 3733, 999, 102], 'token_type_
ids': [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], 'attention_mask': [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]}

input_ids shows the token ID for each token, and token_type_ids shows the type of each
token that separates the first and second sequence, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.9 – Sequence separation for BERT

attention_mask is a mask of 0s and 1s that is used to show the start and end of a sequence for
the transformer model in order to prevent unnecessary computations. Each tokenizer has its own way
of adding special tokens to the original sequence. In the case of the BERT tokenizer, it adds a [CLS]
token to the beginning and an [SEP] token to the end of the sequence, which can be seen by 101
and 102. These numbers come from the token IDs of the pretrained tokenizer.

37

38

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

A tokenizer can be used for both PyTorch- and TensorFlow-based Transformer models. In order
to have an output for each one, the pt and tf keywords must be used in return_tensors. For
example, you can use a tokenizer by simply running the following command:
encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors="pt")

encoded_input has the tokenized text to be used by the PyTorch model. In order to run the
model—for example, the BERT base model—the following code can be used to download the model
from the huggingface model repository:
from transformer import BertModel
model = BertModel.from_pretrained("BERT-base-uncased")

The output of the tokenizer can be passed to the downloaded model with the following line of code:
output = model(**encoded_input)

This will give you the output of the model in the form of embeddings and cross-attention outputs.
When loading and importing models, you can specify which version of a model you are trying to use.
If you simply put TF before the name of a model, the Transformer library will load the TensorFlow
version of it. The following code shows how to load and use the TensorFlow version of BERT base:
from transformers import BertTokenizer, TFBertModel
tokenizer = \
    BertTokenizer.from_pretrained('BERT-base-uncased')
model = TFBertModel.from_pretrained("BERT-base-uncased")
text = " Using Transformer is easy!"
encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='tf')
output = model(**encoded_input)

For specific tasks, such as filling masks using language models, there are pipelines designed by Hugging
Face that are ready to use. For example, the task of filling a mask can be seen in the following code snippet:
from transformers import pipeline
unmasker = \
    pipeline('fill-mask', model='BERT-base-uncased')
unmasker("The man worked as a [MASK].")

This code will produce the following output, which shows the scores and possible tokens to be placed
in the [MASK] token:
[{'score': 0.09747539460659027,  'sequence': 'the man worked
as a carpenter.',  'token': 10533,  'token_str': 'carpenter'},
{'score': 0.052383217960596085,  'sequence': 'the man worked
as a waiter.',  'token': 15610,  'token_str': 'waiter'},
{'score': 0.049627091735601425,  'sequence': 'the man worked

Working with community-provided models

as a barber.',  'token': 13362,  'token_str': 'barber'},
{'score': 0.03788605332374573,  'sequence': 'the man worked
as a mechanic.',  'token': 15893,  'token_str': 'mechanic'},
{'score': 0.03768084570765495,  'sequence': 'the man worked as a
salesman.',  'token': 18968,  'token_str': 'salesman'}]

To get a neat view using pandas, run the following code:
pd.DataFrame(unmasker("The man worked as a [MASK]."))

The result can be seen in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.10 – Output of the BERT mask filling

So far, we have learned how to load and use a pretrained BERT model and have understood the basics
of tokenizers, as well as the difference between PyTorch and TensorFlow versions of the models. In
the next section, we will learn to work with community-provided models by loading different models,
reading the related information provided by the model authors, and using different pipelines such as
text-generation or question-answering (QA) pipelines.

Working with community-provided models
Hugging Face has tons of community models provided by collaborators from large artificial intelligence
(AI) and information technology (IT) companies such as Google and Facebook. Individuals and
universities also provide many interesting models. Accessing and using them is also very easy. To
start, you should visit the Transformer models directory available on their website (https://
huggingface.co/models), as shown in the following screenshot:

39

40

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Figure 2.11 – An overview of Hugging Face models repository

Apart from these models, there are also many good and useful datasets available for NLP tasks. To
start using some of these models, you can explore them by keyword searches, or just specify your
major NLP task and pipeline.
For example, we are looking for a table QA model. After finding a model that we are interested
in, a page such as the following one will be available from the Hugging Face website (https://
huggingface.co/google/tapas-base-finetuned-wtq):

Figure 2.12 – TAPAS model page

On the right side, there is a panel where you can test this model. Note that this is a table QA model
that can answer questions about a table provided to the model. If you ask a question, it will reply by
highlighting the answer. The following screenshot shows how it gets input and provides an answer
for a specific table:

Working with community-provided models

Figure 2.13 – Table QA using TAPAS

Each model has a page provided by the model authors that is also known as a model card. You can
use the model by the examples provided on the model page. For example, you can visit the GPT-2
huggingface repository page and take a look at the example provided by the authors (https://
huggingface.co/gpt2), as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.14 – Text-generation code example from the Hugging Face GPT-2 page

41

42

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Using pipelines is recommended because all the dirty work is taken care of by the Transformer
library. As another example, let’s assume you need an out-of-the-box zero-shot classifier. The following
code snippet shows how easy it is to implement and use such a pretrained model:
from transformers import pipeline
classifier = pipeline("zero-shot-classification",
    model="facebook/bart-large-mnli")
sequence_to_classify = "I am going to france."
candidate_labels = ['travel', 'cooking', 'dancing']
classifier(sequence_to_classify, candidate_labels)

The preceding code will provide the following result:
{'labels': ['travel', 'dancing', 'cooking'], 'scores':
[0.9866883158683777, 0.007197578903287649, 0.006114077754318714],
'sequence': 'I am going to france.'}

We are done with the installation and the hello-world application part. So far, we have introduced
the installation process, completed the environment settings, and experienced the first transformer
pipeline. In the next section, we will introduce the datasets library, which will be an essential
utility in the upcoming experimental chapters.

Working with multimodal transformers
Multimodal transformers such as CLIP are very useful where more than one modality is involved. In
order to provide a use-case for this kind of model, a very simple and straight forward example is given.
Zero-shot image classification can be very useful when only class names or phrases related to the
classes are available. CLIP, which is a multimodal model, is able to represent images and texts in the
same semantic space and can be very handy in this situation. To have a zero-shot image classifier
with no prior knowledge about what classes can be or might be, imagine a case where class names
are given with no examples for each of them. The only knowledge that is available at the moment is
these names or maybe phrases and a set of images, which were not seen before.
1.

The first thing that is needed to perform this experiment is to have a few images or download
them from the internet:
from PIL import Image
import requests
url = "http://images.cocodataset.org/teststuff2017/000000000448.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

2.

Now that you have downloaded the image (a test-related image from the COCO dataset), you
can easily see if you are using Jupyter Notebook or Colab by just running the following code:
image

Working with multimodal transformers

Figure 2.15 – A sample for testing CLIP (http://images.cocodataset.

org/test-stuff2017/000000000448.jpg)

3.

The next step is to just create a prompt to be added for all the classes and then create inputs
for the text part:
prompt = "a photo of a "
class_names = ["fighting", "meeting"]
inputs = [prompt + class_name for class_name in class_names]

4.

Up to this point, the inputs for text and image are ready, but we need to load the model:
from transformers import CLIPProcessor, CLIPModel
model = (CLIPModel.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-largepatch14"))
processor = \
    (CLIPProcessor.from_pretrained("openai/clip-vit-largepatch14"))

5.

This processor is a wrapper that is very useful for tokenization. At the final step, you can hand
the pre-processed and tokenized data to the model and finally get the output:
inputs = processor(text=inputs, images=image,
    return_tensors="pt", padding=True)
outputs = model(**inputs)
logits = outputs.logits_per_image
probs = logits_per_image.softmax(dim=1)

43

44

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Logits have scores related to each combination (first prompt and image and second prompt and image)
10.9 and 18.5. However, to get the final class probabilities, a final SoftMax is applied to it and will give
the results, which are probabilities in our case (0.99 for “meeting”).
Now that we know the basics of multimodal transformers, let’s see how we can use benchmarks and
datasets in the next section.

Working with benchmarks and datasets
Thanks to the transformer architecture and transformer library, we are able to transfer what we have
learned from a particular task to any other task, which is called transfer learning (TL). By transferring
representations between related problems, we are able to train general-purpose models that share
common linguistic knowledge across tasks. We can apply it since current deep learning approaches
allow us to solve many tasks at the same time, also known as multitask learning (MTL), or in order,
also known as sequential transfer learning (STL). Benchmarking mechanisms test the extent to
which these capabilities are possessed by the LM.
Before introducing the datasets library, it is worth talking about important benchmarks such
as General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE), Cross-lingual TRansfer Evaluation
of Multilingual Encoders (XTREME), and Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SquAD).
Benchmarking is especially critical for evaluating transfer learnings within multitask and multilingual
environments. In ML, we mostly tend to focus on a particular metric, which is a performance score
on a certain task or dataset. With these benchmarks, we can measure the transfer learning capacity
of the language models when we try to solve many tasks at the same time.
Let’s start with the benchmarks.

Important benchmarks
In the following subsections, we will introduce the important benchmarks that are widely used by
transformer-based architectures. These benchmarks exclusively contribute a lot to MTL and to multilingual
and zero-shot learning, including many challenging tasks. We will look at the following benchmarks:
• GLUE
• SuperGLUE
• XTREME
• XGLUE
• SQuAD
In order to use fewer pages, we only detail the tasks for the GLUE benchmark.

Working with benchmarks and datasets

GLUE benchmark
Recent studies addressed the fact that multitask training approaches can achieve better results than
single-task learning when using a particular model for a task. In this direction, the GLUE benchmark has
been introduced for MTL, which is a collection of tools and datasets for evaluating the performance of
MTL models across a list of tasks. It offers a public leaderboard for monitoring submission performance
using the benchmark, along with a single-number metric summarizing 11 tasks. This benchmark
includes many sentence-understanding tasks covering various datasets of differing sizes, text types,
and difficulty levels. The tasks are categorized under three types, outlined as follows:
• Single-sentence tasks:
 The Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability (CoLA)dataset. This task consists of English
acceptability judgments drawn from articles on linguistic theory.
 The Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2) dataset. This task includes sentences from movie
reviews and human annotations of their sentiment with pos/neg labels.
• Similarity and paraphrase tasks:
 The Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus (MRPC) dataset. This task looks at whether
the sentences in a pair are semantically equivalent.
 The Quora Question Pairs (QQP) dataset. It contains a pair of questions, and the task is
to check if they are semantically identical.
 The Semantic Textual Similarity Benchmark (STS-B) dataset. The task involves a set of
sentence pairs taken from news headlines, each with a similarity score ranging from 1 to 5.
• Inference tasks:
 The Multi-Genre Natural Language Inference (MNLI) corpus. It is a collection of sentence
pairs, and the task is to predict the relation between premise and hypothesis (entailment,
contradiction, or neither).
 The Question Natural Language Inference (QNLI) dataset. This is a converted version of
SquAD. The task is to check whether a sentence contains the answer to a question.
 The Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) dataset. This is a task of textual entailment
challenges to combine data from various sources. This dataset is similar to the previous QNLI
dataset, where the task is to check whether a first text entails a second one.
 The Winograd Natural Language Inference (WNLI) schema challenge. This is originally
a pronoun resolution task linking a pronoun and a phrase in a sentence. GLUE converted
the problem into sentence-pair classification, as detailed next.

45

46

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

SuperGLUE benchmark
Like Glue, SuperGLUE is a new benchmark styled with a new set of more difficult languageunderstanding tasks and currently offers a public leaderboard of around eight language tasks associated
with a single-number performance metric similar to that of GLUE. The motivation behind it is that as
of writing this book, the current state-of-the-art GLUE score (it is now 91.3 and was 90.8 at the time
of the first edition of the book) surpasses human performance (87.1). Thus, SuperGLUE provides a
more challenging and diverse task toward general-purpose, language-understanding technologies.
However, it seems that now the models outperform SuperGLUE as well. While the human performance
of SuperGLUE is 89.8, the current best model performance is 91.3.
You can access both GLUE and SuperGLUE benchmarks at gluebenchmark.com.

XTREME benchmark
In recent years, NLP researchers have increasingly focused on learning general-purpose representations
rather than a single task that can be applied to many related tasks. Another way of building a generalpurpose language model is by using multilingual tasks. It has been observed that recent multilingual
models, such as Multilingual BERT (mBERT) and XLM-R, pre-trained on massive amounts of
multilingual corpora, have performed better when transferring them to other languages. Thus, the
main advantage here is that cross-lingual generalization enables us to build successful NLP applications
in resource-poor languages through zero-shot cross-lingual transfer.
In this direction, the XTREME benchmark has been designed. It currently includes around 40
different languages belonging to 12 language families and includes nine different tasks that require
reasoning for various levels of syntax or semantics. However, it is still challenging to scale up a model
to cover over 7,000 world languages, and there exists a trade-off between language coverage and
model capability. Please check out the following link for more details on this: https://sites.
research.google/xtreme.

XGLUE benchmark
XGLUE is another cross-lingual benchmark to evaluate and improve the performance of cross-lingual
pretrained models for natural language understanding (NLU) and natural language generation
(NLG). It originally consisted of 11 tasks over 19 languages. The main difference from XTREME is
that the training data are only available in English for each task. This forces the language models to
learn only from the textual data in English and transfer this knowledge to other languages, which is
called zero-shot cross-lingual transfer capability. The second difference is that it has tasks for NLU
and NLG at the same time. Please check out the following link for more details on this: https://
microsoft.github.io/XGLUE/.

Working with benchmarks and datasets

SQuAD benchmark
SQuAD is a widely used QA dataset in the NLP field. It provides a set of QA pairs to benchmark the
reading comprehension capabilities of NLP models. It consists of a list of questions, a reading passage,
and an answer annotated by crowdworkers on a set of Wikipedia articles. The answer to the question is
a span of text from the reading passage. The initial version, SQuAD1.1, doesn’t have an unanswerable
option where the datasets are collected, so each question has an answer to be found somewhere in
the reading passage. The NLP model is forced to answer the question even if this appears impossible.
SQuAD2.0 is an improved version whereby the NLP models must not only answer questions when
possible but should also abstain from answering when it is impossible to answer. SQuAD2.0 contains
50,000 unanswerable questions written adversarially by crowdworkers to look similar to answerable
ones. Additionally, it also has 100,000 questions taken from SQuAD1.1.

Accessing the datasets with an application programming
interface
The datasets library provides a very efficient utility to load, process, and share datasets with the
community through the Hugging Face hub. Like TensorFlow datasets, the datasets library makes
it easier to download, cache, and dynamically load the sets directly from the original dataset host
upon request. The library also provides evaluation metrics along with the data. Indeed, the hub does
not hold or distribute the datasets. Instead, it keeps all information about the dataset, including the
owner, preprocessing script, description, and download link. To see other features, please check the
dataset_infos.json and DataSet-Name.py files of the corresponding dataset under the
GitHub repository of the book (https://github.com/PacktPublishing/MasteringTransformers-Second-Edition).
Let’s start by installing the dataset library as follows:
pip install datasets

The following code automatically loads the cola dataset using the Hugging Face hub. The datasets.
load_dataset() function downloads the loading script from the actual path if the data is not
cached already:
from datasets import load_dataset
cola = load_dataset('glue', 'cola')
cola['train'][25:28]

Important note
Reusability of the datasets: As you re-run the code, the datasets library starts caching your loading
and manipulation request. It first stores the dataset and starts caching your operations on the
dataset, such as splitting, selection, and sorting. You will see a warning message such as “reusing
dataset xtreme (/home/savas/.cache/huggingface/dataset...)” or “loading cached sorted….”

47

48

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

In the preceding example, we downloaded the cola dataset from the GLUE benchmark and selected
a few examples from the train split of it.
Currently, there are 19,298 datasets and 116 metrics (it was 661 NLP datasets and 21 metrics in the
first edition of the book) for diverse tasks, as the following code snippet shows:
from pprint import pprint
from datasets import list_datasets, list_metrics
all_d = list_datasets()
metrics = list_metrics()
print(f"{len(all_d)} datasets and {len(metrics)} metrics \
    exist in the hub\n")
pprint(all_d[:20], compact=True)
pprint(metrics, compact=True)

This is the output:
19298 datasets and 116 metrics exist in the hub.
['acronym_identification', 'ade_corpus_v2', 'adversarial_qa', 'aeslc',
'afrikaans_ner_corpus', 'ag_news', 'ai2_arc', 'air_dialogue', 'ajgt_
twitter_ar', 'allegro_reviews', 'allocine', 'alt', 'amazon_polarity',
'amazon_reviews_multi', 'amazon_us_reviews', 'ambig_qa', 'amttl',
'anli', 'app_reviews', 'aqua_rat']
['accuracy', 'BERTscore', 'bleu', 'bleurt', 'comet', 'coval', 'f1',
'gleu', 'glue', 'indic_glue', 'meteor', 'precision', 'recall',
'rouge', 'sacrebleu', 'sari', 'seqeval', 'squad', 'squad_v2', 'wer',
'xnli']

A dataset might have several configurations. For instance, GLUE, as an aggregated benchmark, has
many subsets, such as CoLA, SST-2, and MRPC, as we mentioned before. To access each GLUE
benchmark dataset, we pass two arguments, where the first is glue and the second is a particular
dataset of its example dataset (cola or sst2) that can be chosen. Likewise, the Wikipedia dataset
has several configurations provided for several languages.
A dataset comes with the DatasetDict object, including several Dataset instances. When the
split selection (split='...') is used, we get Dataset instances. For example, the CoLA dataset
comes with DatasetDict, where we have three splits: train, validation, and test. While the train
and validation datasets include two labels (1 for acceptable and 0 for unacceptable), the label value
of the test split is -1, which means no label.
Let’s see the structure of the CoLA dataset object as follows:
cola = load_dataset('glue', 'cola')
cola
DatasetDict({
train: Dataset({
features: ['sentence', 'label', 'idx'],

Working with benchmarks and datasets

        num_rows: 8551 })
validation: Dataset({
features: ['sentence', 'label', 'idx'],
        num_rows: 1043 })
test: Dataset({
      features: ['sentence', 'label', 'idx'],
       num_rows: 1063  })
})
cola['train'][12]
{'idx': 12, 'label':1,'sentence':'Bill rolled out of the room.'}
cola['validation'][68]
{'idx': 68, 'label': 0, 'sentence': 'Which report that John was
incompetent did he submit?'}
cola['test'][20]
{'idx': 20, 'label': -1, 'sentence': 'Has John seen Mary?'}

The dataset object has some additional metadata information that might be helpful for us: split,
description, citation, homepage, license, and info. Let’s run the following code:
print("1#",cola["train"].description)
print("2#",cola["train"].citation)
print("3#",cola["train"].homepage)
1# GLUE, the General Language Understanding Evaluation
benchmark(https://gluebenchmark.com/) is a collection of
resources for training,evaluating, and analyzing natural language
understanding systems.2# @article{warstadt2018neural,  title={Neural
Network Acceptability Judgments},  author={Warstadt,
Alex and Singh, Amanpreet and Bowman, Samuel
R},  journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.12471},  year={2018}}@
inproceedings{wang2019glue,  title={{GLUE}: A Multi-Task Benchmark and
Analysis Platform for Natural Language Understanding},  author={Wang,
Alex and Singh, Amanpreet and Michael, Julian and Hill, Felix and
Levy, Omer and Bowman, Samuel R.},  note={In the Proceedings of
ICLR.},  year={2019}}3# https://nyu-mll.github.io/CoLA/

The GLUE benchmark provides many datasets, as mentioned previously. Let’s download the MRPC
dataset as follows:
mrpc = load_dataset('glue', 'mrpc')

Likewise, to access other GLUE tasks, we will change the second parameter as follows:
load_dataset('glue', 'XYZ')

In order to apply a sanity check of data availability, run the following piece of code:
glue=['cola', 'sst2', 'mrpc', 'qqp', 'stsb', 'mnli',
    'mnli_mismatched', 'mnli_matched', 'qnli', 'rte',

49

50

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

    'wnli', 'ax']
for g in glue:
    _=load_dataset('glue', g)

XTREME (working with a cross-lingual dataset) is another popular cross-lingual dataset that we
already discussed. Let’s pick the MLQA example from the XTREME set. MLQA is a subset of the
XTREME benchmark, which is designed to assess the performance of cross-lingual QA models. It
includes about 5,000 extractive QA instances in the SQuAD format across seven languages, which
are English, German, Arabic, Hindi, Vietnamese, Spanish, and Simplified Chinese.
For example, MLQA.en.de is an English-German QA example dataset and can be loaded as follows:
en_de = load_dataset('xtreme', 'MLQA.en.de')
en_de
    DatasetDict({
test: Dataset({features: ['id', 'title', 'context', 'question',
'answers'], num_rows: 4517
}) validation: Dataset({ features: ['id', 'title', 'context',
'question', 'answers'], num_rows: 512})})

It could be more convenient to view it within a pandas DataFrame:
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame(en_de['test'][0:4])

Here is the output of the preceding code:

Figure 2.16 – English-German cross-lingual QA dataset

Now, we are ready to manipulate the dataset instances!

Data manipulation using the datasets library

Data manipulation using the datasets library
Datasets come with many dictionaries of subsets, where the split parameter is used to decide which
subset(s) or portion of the subset is to be loaded. If this is none by default, it will return a dataset
dictionary of all subsets (train, test, validation, or any other combination). If the split
parameter is specified, it will return a single dataset rather than a dictionary. For the following example,
we retrieve a train split of the cola dataset only:
cola_train = load_dataset('glue', 'cola', split ='train')

We can get a mixture of the train and validation subsets as follows:
cola_sel = load_dataset('glue', 'cola',
    split = 'train[:300]+validation[-30:]')

The split expression means that the first 300 examples of train and the last 30 examples of
validation are obtained as cola_sel.
We can apply different combinations, as shown in the following split examples:
• The first 100 examples from train and validation, as shown here:
split='train[:100]+validation[:100]'

• 50% of train and the last 30% of validation, as shown here:
split='train[:50%]+validation[-30%:]'

• The first 20% of train and the examples in the slice [30:50] from validation, as shown here:
split='train[:20%]+validation[30:50]'

Now, we will see how to sort and shuffle the dataset!

Sorting, indexing, and shuffling
The following execution calls the sort() function of the cola_sel object. We see the first 15 and
the last 15 labels:
cola_sel.sort('label')['label'][:15]
[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
cola_sel.sort('label')['label'][-15:]
[1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]

51

52

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

We are already familiar with Python slicing notation. Likewise, we can also access several rows using
similar slice notation or with a list of indices as follows:
cola_sel[6,19,44]
{'idx': [6, 19, 44],
'label': [1, 1, 1],
'sentence':['Fred watered the plants flat.',
  'The professor talked us into a stupor.',
  'The trolley rumbled through the tunnel.']}

We shuffle the dataset as follows:
cola_sel.shuffle(seed=42)[2:5]
{'idx': [159, 1022, 46],
'label': [1, 0, 1],
'sentence': ['Mary gets depressed if she listens to the Grateful
Dead.',
'It was believed to be illegal by them to do that.',
'The bullets whistled past the house.']}

Important note
Seed value: When shuffling, we need to pass a seed value to control the randomness and achieve
a consistent output between the author and the reader.

Caching and reusability
Using cached files allows us to load large datasets by means of memory mapping (if datasets fit on the
drive) by using a fast backend. Such smart caching helps to save and reuse the results of operations
executed on the drive. To see cache logs with regard to the dataset, run the following code:
cola_sel.cache_files
[{'filename': '/home/savas/.cache/huggingface...,'skip': 0,  'take':
300}, {'filename': '/home/savas/.cache/huggingface...','skip':
1013,  'take': 30}]

The output indicated that the data are already cached!

Data manipulation using the datasets library

Dataset filter and map function
We might want to work with a specific selection of a dataset. For instance, we can retrieve sentences only,
including the term kick in the cola dataset, as shown in the following execution. The datasets.
Dataset.filter() function returns sentences, including kick, where an anonymous function
and a lambda keyword are applied:
cola_sel = load_dataset('glue', 'cola',
    split='train[:100%]+validation[-30%:]')
cola_sel.filter(lambda s: "kick" in s['sentence'])["sentence"][:3]
['Jill kicked the ball from home plate to third base.', 'Fred kicked
the ball under the porch.', 'Fred kicked the ball behind the tree.']

The following filtering is used to get positive (acceptable) examples from the set:
cola_sel.filter(lambda s: s['label']== 1 )["sentence"][:3]
["Our friends won't buy this analysis, let alone the next one we
propose.",
"One more pseudo generalization and I'm giving up.",
"One more pseudo generalization or I'm giving up."]

In some cases, we might not know the integer code of a class label. Suppose we have many classes, and
the code of the culture class is hard to remember out of 10 classes. Instead of giving the integer code
1, as with our preceding example, which is the code for acceptable, we can pass an acceptable
label to the str2int() function as follows:
cola_sel.filter(lambda s: s['label']== \
    cola_sel.features['label'].str2int('acceptable')
    )["sentence"][:3]

This produces the same output as for the previous execution.

Processing data with the map function
The datasets.Dataset.map() function iterates over the dataset, applying a processing function
to each example in the set, and it modifies the content of the examples. The following execution shows
a new 'len' feature being added that denotes the length of a sentence:
cola_new=cola_sel.map(lambda e:{'len': \
    len(e['sentence'])})
pd.DataFrame(cola_new[0:3])

53

54

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

This is the output of the preceding code snippet:

Figure 2.17 – Cola dataset with an additional column

As another example, the following piece of code cut the sentence after 20 characters. We do not create
a new feature but, instead, update the content of the sentence feature as follows:
cola_cut=cola_new.map(lambda e: {'sentence': e['sentence'][:20]+ '_'})

The output is shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 2.18 – Cola dataset with an update

This is enough to work with an already prepared dataset. Now, it is time to work with our real datasets.

Working with local files
To load a dataset from local files in a comma-separated values (CSV), text (TXT), or JavaScript
object notation (JSON) format, we pass the file type (csv, text, or json) to the generic load_
dataset() loading script, as shown in the following code snippet. Under the ../data/ folder,
there are three CSV files (a.csv, b.csv, and c.csv), which are randomly selected toy examples
from the SST-2 dataset. We can load a single file, as shown in the data1 object, merge many files, as
in the data2 object, or make dataset splits, as in data3:
from datasets import load_dataset
data1 = load_dataset('csv',
data_files='../data/a.csv',
delimiter="\t")
data2 = load_dataset('csv',
data_files=['../data/a.csv',
    '../data/b.csv',
    '../data/c.csv'],

Data manipulation using the datasets library

delimiter="\t")
data3 = load_dataset('csv',
data_files={
    'train':['../data/a.csv','../data/b.csv'],
    'test':['../data/c.csv']}, delimiter="\t")

In order to get the files in other formats, we pass json or text instead of csv, as follows:
data_json = load_dataset('json', data_files='a.json')
data_text = load_dataset('text', data_files='a.txt')

So far, we have discussed how to load, handle, and manipulate datasets that are either already hosted
in the hub or are on our local drive. Now, we will study how to prepare datasets for transformer
model training.

Preparing a dataset for model training
Let’s start with the tokenization process. Each model has its own tokenization model that is trained
before the actual language model. We will discuss it in detail in the next chapter. To use a tokenizer,
we should install the Transformer library. The following example loads the tokenizer model from
the pretrained distilBERT-base-uncased model. We use map and an anonymous function
with lambda to apply a tokenizer to each split in data3. If batched is selected as True in the
map function, it provides a batch of examples to the tokenizer function. The batch_size value
is 1000 by default, which is the number of examples per batch passed to the function. If not selected,
the whole dataset is passed as a single batch. The code can be seen here:
from Transformer import DistilBERTTokenizer
tokenizer = (DistilBERTTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    'distilBERT-base-uncased'))
encoded_data3 = data3.map(lambda e: tokenizer(
    e['sentence'], padding=True, truncation=True,
    max_length=12), batched=True, batch_size=1000)

As shown in the following output, we see the difference between data3 and encoded_data3,
where two additional features—attention_mask and input_ids—are added to the datasets
accordingly. We already introduced these two features in the previous part in this chapter. Put simply,
input_ids are the indices corresponding to each token in the sentence. They are expected features
needed by the Trainer class of Transformer, which we will discuss in the next fine-tuning chapters.

55

56

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

We mostly pass several sentences at once (called a batch) to the tokenizer and further pass the tokenized
batch to the model. To do so, we pad each sentence to the maximum sentence length in the batch or a
particular maximum length specified by the max_length parameter—12 in this toy example. We also
truncate longer sentences to fit that maximum length. The code can be seen in the following snippet:
data3
DatasetDict({
train: Dataset({
   features: ['sentence','label'], num_rows: 199 })
test: Dataset({
   features: ['sentence','label'], num_rows: 100 })})
encoded_data3
DatasetDict({
train: Dataset({
  features: ['attention_mask', 'input_ids', 'label',   'sentence'],
   num_rows: 199 })
test: Dataset({
features: ['attention_mask', 'input_ids', 'label', 'sentence'],
num_rows: 100 })})
print(encoded_data3['test'][12])
{'attention_mask': [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], 'input_ids':
[101, 2019, 5186, 16010, 2143, 1012, 102, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0], 'label': 0,
'sentence': 'an extremely unpleasant film . '}

We are done with the datasets library. Up to this point, we have evaluated all aspects of the datasets.
We have covered GLUE-like benchmarking, where classification metrics are taken into consideration.
In the next section, we will focus on how to benchmark computational performance for speed and
memory rather than classification.

Benchmarking for speed and memory
Just comparing the classification performance of large models on a specific task or a benchmark might
turn out to be no longer sufficient. We may need faster inference and memory performance. Thus, we
must also consider the computational cost of a particular model for a given environment (randomaccess memory (RAM), CPU, and GPU) in terms of memory usage and speed. The computational
cost of training and deploying to production for inference are the two main values to be measured.
Two classes of the Transformer library, PyTorchBenchmark and TensorFlowBenchmark,
make it possible to benchmark models for both TensorFlow and PyTorch.
Before we start our experiment, we need to check our GPU capabilities with the following execution:
import torch
print(f"The GPU total memory is \

Benchmarking for speed and memory

    {torch.cuda.get_device_properties(0).total_memory/(1024**3)} GB")
The GPU total memory is 2.89 GB

The output is obtained from NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1050 (3 gigabytes (GB)). The Transformer
library currently only supports single-device benchmarking. When we conduct benchmarking on
a GPU, we are expected to indicate which GPU device the Python code will run on, which is done
by setting the CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES environment variable. For example, export CUDA_
VISIBLE_DEVICES=0 indicates that the first cuda device will be used.
In the following code example, we compare four randomly selected pretrained BERT models, as listed
in the models array. We try different sequence lengths with the help of the sequence_lengths
list parameter. We keep the batch size at 4. If you have a better GPU capacity, you can extend the
parameter search space with batch values in the range 4–64 and with other parameters:
from transformers import PyTorchBenchmark, PyTorchBenchmarkArguments
models= ["BERT-base-uncased",
    "distilBERT-base-uncased","distilroBERTa-base",
    "distilBERT-base-german-cased"]
batch_sizes=[4]
sequence_lengths=[32,64, 128, 256,512]
args = PyTorchBenchmarkArguments(models=models,
    batch_sizes=batch_sizes,
    sequence_lengths=sequence_lengths,
    multi_process=False)
benchmark = PyTorchBenchmark(args)

Important note
Benchmarking for TensorFlow: The code examples are for PyTorch benchmarking in this part.
For TensorFlow benchmarking, we simply use the TensorFlowBenchmarkArguments
and TensorFlowBenchmark counterpart classes instead.
We are ready to conduct the benchmarking experiment by running the following code:
results = benchmark.run()

This may take some time, depending on your CPU/GPU capacity and argument selection. If you face
an out-of-memory problem for this, you should take the following actions to overcome it:
• Restart your kernel or your operating system.
• Delete all unnecessary objects in the memory before starting.
• Set a lower batch size, such as 2, or even 1.
The following output indicates the inference speed performance. Since our search space has four
different models and five different sequence lengths, we see 20 rows in the results:

57

58

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Figure 2.19 – Inference speed performance

Likewise, we see the inference memory usage for 20 different scenarios as follows:

Figure 2.20 – Inference memory usage

Benchmarking for speed and memory

To observe memory usage across the parameters, we will plot them using the results object, which
stores the statistics. The following execution will plot the time inference performance across models
and sequence lengths:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
plt.figure(figsize=(8,8))
t=sequence_lengths
models_perf=[list(
    results.time_inference_result[m]['result'][batch_sizes[0]].
values()
    ) for m in models]
plt.xlabel('Seq Length')
plt.ylabel('Time in Second')
plt.title('Inference Speed Result')
plt.plot(t, models_perf[0], 'rs--',
    t, models_perf[1], 'g--.',
    t, models_perf[2], 'b--^',
    t, models_perf[3], 'c--o')
plt.legend(models)
plt.show()

As shown in the following screenshot, two DistilBERT models showed close results and performed
better than other two models. The BERT-based-uncased model performs poorly compared to
the others, especially as the sequence length increases:

59

60

A Hands-On Introduction to the Subject

Figure 2.21 – Inference speed result

To plot the memory performance, you need to use the memory_inference_result result of
the results object instead of time_inference_result, as shown in the preceding code.
For more interesting benchmarking examples, please check out the following links:
• https://huggingface.co/transformers/benchmarks.html
• https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/master/notebooks
Now that we are done with this section, we have successfully completed this chapter. Congratulations
on achieving the installation, running your first hello-world transformer program, working with
the datasets library, and benchmarking!

Summary

Summary
In this chapter, we have covered a variety of introductory topics, and we also got our hands dirty
with the hello-world transformer application. On the other hand, this chapter plays a crucial
role in terms of applying what has been learned so far to the upcoming chapters. So, what has been
learned so far? We took the first small step by setting up the environment and system installation.
In this context, the anaconda package manager helped us to install the necessary modules for the
main operating systems. We also went through language models, community-provided models, and
tokenization processes. We have tested a very simple approach for zero-shot image classification using
multimodal models and a very simple prompt. Additionally, we introduced multitask (GLUE) and
cross-lingual benchmarking (XTREME), which enables these language models to become stronger
and more accurate. The datasets library was introduced, which facilitates efficient access to NLP
datasets provided by the community. Finally, we learned how to evaluate the computational cost of
a particular model in terms of memory usage and speed. Transformers frameworks make it possible
to benchmark models for both TensorFlow and PyTorch.
The models used in this section were already trained and shared with us by the community. Now, it
is our turn to train a language model and disseminate it to the community. In the next chapter, we
will learn how to train a BERT language model, as well as a tokenizer, and how to share them with
the community.

61

Part 2:
Transformer Models:
From Autoencoders to
Autoregressive Models

In this part, we’ll delve into the fascinating world of encoder-based and generative language models.
We’ll explore how these models are pre-trained and fine-tuned, providing you with valuable insights
into everyday topics such as fine-tuning, inference, and parameter optimization. But we’re not stopping
there. We’ll also tackle advanced subjects such as enhancing model performance and effective finetuning strategies. The knowledge gained here will pave the way for the more advanced topics to come.
This part has the following chapters:
• Chapter 3, Autoencoding Language Models
• Chapter 4, From Generative Models to Large Language Models
• Chapter 5, Fine-Tuning Language Model for Text Classification
• Chapter 6, Fine-Tuning Language Model for Token Classification
• Chapter 7, Text Representation
• Chapter 8, Boosting Model Performance
• Chapter 9, Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

3
Autoencoding
Language Models
In the previous chapter, we looked at and studied how a typical transformer model can be used by
Hugging Face’s Transformers. All of the topics in this book so far have included instructions on how
to use pre-trained or pre-built models and less information has been given about specific models and
their training.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can train autoencoding language models on any given language
from scratch. This training will include pretraining and task-specific training of the models. First,
we will start with learning about the BERT model and how it works. Then, we will train the language
model using a simple and small corpus. Afterward, we will look at how the model can be used inside
any Keras model.
For an overview of what will be learned in this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) – one of the autoencoding
language models
• Autoencoding language model training for any language
• Sharing models with the community
• Understanding other autoencoding models
• Working with tokenization algorithms

Technical requirements
The technical requirements for this chapter are as follows:
• Anaconda
• transformers >= 4.0.0

66

Autoencoding Language Models

• pytorch >= 1.0.2
• tensorflow >= 2.4.0
• datasets >= 1.4.1
• tokenizers
Please also check the corresponding GitHub code of Chapter 3 using https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

BERT – one of the autoencoding language models
BERT was one of the first autoencoding language models to utilize the encoder Transformer stack
with slight modifications for language modeling.
The BERT architecture is a multilayer Transformer encoder based on the original Transformer
implementation. The Transformer model itself was originally made for machine translation tasks, but
the main improvement made by BERT is the utilization of this part of the architecture to provide better
language modeling. This language model, after pretraining, is able to provide a global understanding
of the language it is trained on.
In the next subsections, you will learn about autoencoding models such as BERT. You will also learn
how to pretrain a model and share it with a community. In the next section, BERT is explained in
more detail.

BERT language model pretraining tasks
To have a clear understanding of the MLM used by BERT, let’s define it in more detail. MLM is the
task of training a model on input (a sentence with some masked tokens) and obtaining the output as
the whole sentence with the masked tokens filled. But how and why does it help a model to obtain
better results on downstream tasks such as classification? The answer is simple: if the model can do
a cloze test (a linguistic test for evaluating language understanding by filling in blanks), then it has
a general understanding of the language itself. For other tasks, it has been pretrained (by language
modeling) and will perform better.
Here’s an example of a cloze test: George Washington was the first President of the ___ States.
It is expected that “United” should fill in the blank. For a masked language model, the same task is
applied, and it is required to fill in the masked tokens. However, masked tokens are selected randomly
from a sentence.

BERT – one of the autoencoding language models

Another task that BERT is trained on is Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). This pretraining task ensures
that BERT learns not only the relations of all tokens to each other in predicting masked ones but also
helps it understand the relation between two sentences. A pair of sentences is selected and given to
BERT with a [SEP] splitter token in between. It is also known from the dataset whether the second
sentence comes after the first one or not.
The following is an example of NSP: It is required that the reader fill in the blanks. Bitcoin prices are
way over too high compared to other altcoins.
In this example, the model is required to predict it as negative (the sentences are not related to each other).
These two pretraining tasks enable BERT to have an understanding of the language itself. BERT token
embeddings provide a contextual embedding for each token. Contextual embedding means each token
has an embedding that is completely related to the surrounding tokens. Unlike word2vec and other
such models, BERT provides better information for each token embedding. NSP tasks, on the other
hand, enable BERT to have better embeddings for [CLS] tokens. This token, as was discussed in the
first chapter, provides information about the whole input. [CLS] is used for classification tasks and,
in the pretraining part, learns the overall embedding of the whole input. The following figure shows
an overview of the BERT model and the respective input and output of the BERT model:

Figure 3.1 – The BERT model

Let’s move on to the next section!

A deeper look into the BERT language model
Tokenizers are one of the most important parts of many NLP applications in their respective pipelines.
For BERT, WordPiece tokenization is used. Generally, WordPiece, SentencePiece, and byte pair
encoding (BPE) are the three most widely known tokenizers, used by different Transformer-based
architectures, which are also covered in the next sections. The primary differences lie in their
merging strategies, unit representations (bytes, characters, or subword units), and their flexibility in
tokenization schemes and segmentation modes. Each of these algorithms has its advantages and can
be chosen based on the specific requirements of the task at hand. The main reason that BERT or any
other Transformer-based architecture uses subword tokenization is the ability of such tokenizers to
deal with unknown tokens.

67

68

Autoencoding Language Models

BERT also uses positional encoding to ensure the position of the tokens is given to the model. If you
recall from Chapter 1, BERT and similar models use non-sequential operations such as dense neural
layers. Traditional models, such as LSTM- and RNN-based models, care the natural position In order
to provide this extra information to BERT, positional encoding comes in handy.
The pretraining of BERT, such as autoencoding models, provides language-wise information for the
model, but in practice, when dealing with different problems such as sequence classification, token
classification, or question answering, different parts of the model output are used.
For example, in the case of a sequence classification task, such as sentiment analysis or sentence
classification, it is proposed by the original BERT article that CLS embedding from the last layer must
be used. However, other research performs classification using different techniques using BERT (using
average token embedding from all tokens, deploying an LSTM over the last layer, or even using a
CNN on top of the last layer). The last [CLS] embedding for sequence classification can be used by
any classifier, but the proposed, and the most common one, is a dense layer with an input size equal
to the final token embedding size and an output size equal to the number of classes with a softmax
activation function. Using sigmoid is also another alternative when the output could be multilabel
and the problem itself is a multilabel classification problem.
To give you more detailed information about how BERT actually works, the following diagram shows
an example of an NSP task. Note that the tokenization is simplified here for better understanding:

Figure 3.2 – BERT example for an NSP task

BERT – one of the autoencoding language models

The BERT model has different variations with different settings. For example, the size of the input is
variable. In the preceding example, it is set to 512, and the maximum sequence size that the model
can get as input is 512. However, this size includes special tokens, [CLS] and [SEP], so it will be
reduced to 510. On the other hand, using WordPiece as a tokenizer yields subword tokens and the
sequence size, before we can have fewer words, and, after tokenization, the size will increase because
the tokenizer breaks words into subwords if they are not commonly seen in the pretrained corpus.
The following screenshot shows an illustration of BERT for different tasks. For an NER task, the
output of each token is used instead of [CLS]. In the case of question answering, the question and
the answer are concatenated using the [SEP] delimiter token, and the answer is annotated using
“Start/End” and the span output from the last layer. In this case, Paragraph is the context that Question
is asking about it:

Figure 3.3 – BERT model for various NLP tasks

69

70

Autoencoding Language Models

Regardless of all of these tasks, the most important of BERT’s abilities is its contextual representation
of text. The reason it is successful in various tasks is because of the Transformer encoder architecture
that represents input in the form of dense vectors. These vectors can be easily transformed into output
by very simple classifiers.
Positional encoding is essential in maintaining word order. It adds very small amounts of values
to the word embeddings to ensure that they are semantically close to what they mean, but they also
have a specific order.
Up to this point, you have learned about BERT and how it works. You have learned detailed information
on various tasks that BERT can be used for and the important points of this architecture.
In the next section, you will learn how you can pretrain BERT and use it after training.

Autoencoding language model training for any language
We have discussed how BERT works and that it is possible to use the pretrained version of it provided
by the Hugging Face repository. In this section, you will learn how to use the Hugging Face library
to train your own BERT.
Before we start, it is essential to have good training data, because it will be used for the language
modeling. This data is called the corpus, which is normally a huge pile of data (sometimes it is
preprocessed and cleaned). This unlabeled corpus must be appropriate for the use case you wish to
have your language model trained on; for example, if you are trying to have a special BERT for, let’s
say, the English language. Although there are tons of huge, good datasets, such as Common Crawl
(https://commoncrawl.org/), we would prefer a small one for faster training.
The IMDB dataset of 50 K movie reviews (available at https://www.kaggle.com/
lakshmi25npathi/imdb-dataset-of-50k-movie-reviews) is a large dataset for
sentiment analysis, but small if you use it as a corpus for training your language model:
1.

You can easily download and save it in the .txt format for language model and tokenizer
training by using the following code:
import pandas as pd
imdb_df = pd.read_csv("IMDB Dataset.csv")
reviews = imdb_df.review.to_string(index=None)
with open("corpus.txt", "w") as f:
    f.writelines(reviews)

Autoencoding language model training for any language

2.

After preparing the corpus, the tokenizer must be trained. The tokenizers library provides
fast and easy training for the WordPiece tokenizer. In order to train it on your corpus, you
must run the following code:
from tokenizers import BertWordPieceTokenizer
bert_wordpiece_tokenizer =BertWordPieceTokenizer()
bert_wordpiece_tokenizer.train("corpus.txt")

3.

This will train the tokenizer. You can access the trained vocabulary by using the get_vocab()
function of the trained tokenizer object. You can get the vocabulary by using the following code:
bert_wordpiece_tokenizer.get_vocab()

The following is the output:
{'almod': 9111, 'events': 3710, 'bogart': 7647, 'slapstick':
9541, 'terrorist': 16811, 'patter': 9269, '183': 16482, '##cul':
14292, 'sophie': 13109, 'thinki': 10265, 'tarnish': 16310,
'##outh': 14729, 'peckinpah': 17156, 'gw': 6157, '##cat':
14290, '##eing': 14256, 'successfully': 12747, 'roomm': 7363,
'stalwart': 13347,...}

4.

It is essential to save the tokenizer to be used afterward. Using the save_model() function
of the object and providing the directory will save the tokenizer vocabulary for further usage:
bert_wordpiece_tokenizer.save_model("tokenizer")

5.

You can reload it by using the from_file() function:
tokenizer = \
    BertWordPieceTokenizer.from_file("tokenizer/vocab.txt")

6.

You can use the tokenizer by following this example:
tokenized_sentence = \
    tokenizer.encode("Oh it works just fine")
tokenized_sentence.tokens
['[CLS]', 'oh', 'it', 'works', 'just', 'fine','[SEP]']

The special [CLS] and [SEP] tokens will be automatically added to the list of tokens because
BERT needs them for processing input.
7.

Let’s try another sentence using our tokenizer:
tokenized_sentence = \
    tokenizer.encode("ohoh i thougt it might be workingg well")
['[CLS]', 'oh', '##o', '##h', 'i', 'thoug', '##t', 'it',
'might', 'be', 'working', '##g', 'well', '[SEP]']

71

72

Autoencoding Language Models

8.

It seems like a good tokenizer for noisy and misspelled text. Now that you have your tokenizer
ready and saved, you can train your own BERT. The first step is to use BertTokenizerFast
from the Transformers library. You are required to load the trained tokenizer from the previous
step by using the following command:
from transformers import BertTokenizerFast
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained("tokenizer")

We have used BertTokenizerFast because it is suggested by the Hugging Face documentation.
There is also BertTokenizer, which, according to the definition from the library documentation,
is not implemented as fast as the fast version. In most of the pretrained models’ documentation
and cards, it is highly recommended to use the BertTokenizerFast version.
9.

The next step is preparing the corpus for faster training by using the following command:
from transformers import LineByLineTextDataset
dataset = \
    LineByLineTextDataset(tokenizer=tokenizer,
        file_path="corpus.txt",
        block_size=128)

10. You must provide a data collator for MLM:
from transformers import DataCollatorForLanguageModeling
data_collator = DataCollatorForLanguageModeling(
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    mlm=True,
    mlm_probability=0.15)

The data collator gets the data and prepares it for the training. For example, the preceding data
collator takes data and prepares it for MLM with a probability of 0.15. The purpose of using
such a mechanism is to do the preprocessing on the fly, which makes it possible to use fewer
resources. On the other hand, it slows down the training process because each sample has to
be preprocessed on the fly at training time.
11. The training arguments also provide information for the trainer in the training phase, which
can be set by using the following command:
from transformers import TrainingArguments
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir="BERT",
    overwrite_output_dir=True,
    num_train_epochs=1,
    per_device_train_batch_size=128)

Autoencoding language model training for any language

12. We’ll now make the BERT model itself, which we are going to use with the default configuration
(the number of attention heads, Transformer encoder layers, and so on):
from transformers import BertConfig, BertForMaskedLM
bert = BertForMaskedLM(BertConfig())

13. The final step is to make a Trainer object:
from transformers import Trainer
trainer = Trainer(model=bert,
    args=training_args,
    data_collator=data_collator,
    train_dataset=dataset)

14. Finally, you can train your language model using the following command:
trainer.train()

It will show you a progress bar indicating the progress made in training:

Figure 3.4 – BERT model training progress

During the model training, a log directory called runs will be used to store the checkpoint
in steps:

Figure 3.5 – BERT model checkpoints

15. After the training is finished, you can easily save the model using the following command:
trainer.save_model("MyBERT")

Up to this point, you have learned how you can train BERT from scratch for any specific
language that you desire. You’ve learned how to train the tokenizer and BERT model using
the corpus you have prepared.
16. The default configuration that you provided for BERT is the most essential part of this training
process because it defines the architecture of BERT and its hyperparameters. You can take a
peek at these parameters by using the following code:
from transformers import BertConfig
BertConfig()

73

74

Autoencoding Language Models

The following is the output:

Figure 3.6 – BERT model configuration

If you wish to replicate tiny, mini, small, base, and relative models from the original
BERT configurations (https://github.com/google-research/bert), you can
change these settings:

Figure 3.7 – BERT model configurations

Note that changing these parameters, especially max_position_embedding, num_
attention_heads, num_hidden_layers, intermediate_size, and hidden_
size, directly affects the training time. Increasing them dramatically increases the training
time for a large corpus.

Autoencoding language model training for any language

17. For example, you can easily make a new configuration for a tiny version of BERT for faster
training using the following code:
tiny_bert_config = \
    BertConfig(max_position_embeddings=512,
        hidden_size=128,
        num_attention_heads=2,
        num_hidden_layers=2,
        intermediate_size=512)
tiny_bert_config

The following is the result of the code:

Figure 3.8 – Tiny BERT model configuration

18. By using the same method, we can make a tiny BERT model using this configuration:
tiny_bert = BertForMaskedLM(tiny_bert_config)

19. Using the same parameters for training, you can train this tiny new BERT:
trainer = Trainer(model=tiny_bert, args=training_args,
    data_collator=data_collator,
    train_dataset=dataset)
trainer.train()

75

76

Autoencoding Language Models

The following is the output:

Figure 3.9 – Tiny BERT model configuration

It is clear that the training time has dramatically decreased, but you should be aware that this
is a tiny version of BERT with fewer layers and parameters, which is not as good as the BERT
base model.
Up to this point, you have learned how to train your own model from scratch, but it is essential
to note that using the Datasets library is a better choice when dealing with datasets for
training language models or leveraging it to perform task-specific training.
20. The BERT language model can also be used as an embedding layer combined with any deep
learning model. For example, you can load any pretrained BERT model or your own version
that has been trained in Step 19. The following code shows how you must load it to be used
in a Keras model:
from transformers import (
    TFBertModel, BertTokenizerFast)
bert = TFBertModel.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")
tokenizer = \
BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")

21. You do not need the whole model; instead, you can access the layers by using the following code:
bert.layers
[<Transformers.models.bert.modeling_tf_bert.TFBertMainLayer at
0x7f72459b1110>]

22. As you can see, there is just a single layer from TFBertMainLayer, which you can access
within your Keras model. However, before using it, it is nice to test it and see what kind of
output it provides:
tokenized_text = tokenizer.batch_encode_plus(
    ["hello how is it going with you",
    "lets test it"],
    return_tensors="tf",
    max_length=256,
    truncation=True,
    pad_to_max_length=True)
bert(tokenized_text)

The output is as follows:

Autoencoding language model training for any language

Figure 3.10 – BERT model output

As can be seen from the result, there are two outputs: one for the last hidden state and one
for the pooler output. The last hidden state provides all token embeddings from BERT with
additional [CLS] and [SEP] tokens at the start and end, respectively.
23. Now that you have learned more about the TensorFlow version of BERT, you can make a Keras
model using this new embedding:
from tensorflow import keras
import tensorflow as tf
max_length = 256
tokens = keras.layers.Input(shape=(max_length,),
    dtype=tf.dtypes.int32)
masks = keras.layers.Input(shape=(max_length,),
    dtype=tf.dtypes.int32)
embedding_layer = bert.layers[0]([tokens,masks])[0][:,0,:]

77

78

Autoencoding Language Models

dense = tf.keras.layers.Dense(units=2,
    activation="softmax")(embedding_layer)
model = keras.Model([tokens,masks],dense)

24. The model object, which is a Keras model, has two inputs: one for tokens and one for masks.
Tokens have inputs_ids from the tokenizer output and the masks will have attention_
mask. Let’s try it and see what happens:
tokenized = tokenizer.batch_encode_plus(
    ["hello how is it going with you",
    "hello how is it going with you"],
    return_tensors="tf",
    max_length= max_length,
    truncation=True,
    pad_to_max_length=True)

25. It is important to use max_length, truncation, and pad_to_max_length when using a
tokenizer. These parameters make sure that you have the output in a usable shape by padding
it to the maximum length of 256, which was defined before. Now, you can run the model
using this sample:
model([tokenized["input_ids"],tokenized["attention_mask"]])

The following is the output:

Figure 3.11 – BERT model classification output

26. When training the model, you need to compile it using the compile function:
model.compile(optimizer="Adam",
    loss="categorical_crossentropy",
    metrics=["accuracy"])
model.summary()

The output is as follows:

Autoencoding language model training for any language

Figure 3.12 – BERT model summary

27. From the model summary, you can see that the model has 109,483,778 trainable parameters,
including BERT. However, if you have your BERT model pretrained and you want to freeze it
in task-specific training, you can do so with the following command:
model.layers[2].trainable = False

As far as we know, the layer index of the embedding layer is 2, so we can simply freeze it. If
you rerun the summary function, you will see that the trainable parameters are reduced to
1,538 which is the number of parameters of the last layer:

Figure 3.13 – BERT model summary with fewer trainable parameters

79

80

Autoencoding Language Models

28. As you recall, we used the IMDB sentiment analysis dataset for training the language model.
Now, you can use it for training the Keras-based model for sentiment analysis. But first, you
need to prepare the input and output:
import pandas as pd
imdb_df = pd.read_csv("IMDB Dataset.csv")
reviews = list(imdb_df.review)
tokenized_reviews = tokenizer.batch_encode_plus(
        reviews, return_tensors="tf",
        max_length=max_length,
        truncation=True,
        pad_to_max_length=True)
import numpy as np
train_split = int(0.8 *
    len(tokenized_reviews["attention_mask"]))
train_tokens = tokenized_reviews["input_ids"][:train_split]
test_tokens = tokenized_reviews["input_ids"][train_split:]
train_masks = tokenized_reviews["attention_mask"][:train_split]
test_masks = tokenized_reviews["attention_mask"][train_split:]
sentiments = list(imdb_df.sentiment)
labels = np.array([[0,1] if sentiment == "positive" else\
    [1,0] for sentiment in sentiments])
train_labels = labels[:train_split]
test_labels = labels[train_split:]

29. Finally, your data is ready, and you can fit your model:
model.fit([train_tokens,train_masks], train_labels, epochs=5)

After fitting the model, your model is ready to be used. Up to this point, you have learned how
to perform model training for a classification task. You have learned how to save it, and in the
next section, you will learn how it is possible to share the trained model with the community.

Sharing models with the community
Trained models can be easily shared with the community. This provides more visibility for your work.
Hugging Face provides a very easy-to-use model-sharing mechanism:
1.

You can simply use the following cli tool to log in:
Transformers-cli login

2.

After you’ve logged in using your own credentials, you can create a repository:
Transformers-cli repo create a-fancy-model-name

Other autoencoding models

3.

You can put any model name for the a-fancy-model-name parameter, and then it is
essential to make sure you have git-lfs:
git lfs install

Git LFS is a Git extension used for handling large files. Hugging Face pretrained models are
usually large files that require extra libraries such as LFS to be handled by Git.
4.

Then, you can clone the repository you have just created:
git clone https://huggingface.co/username/a-fancy-model-name

5.

Afterward, you can add and remove from the repository as you like, and then, just like Git
usage, you have to run the following command:
git add . && git commit -m "Update from $USER"
git push

Autoencoding models rely on the left encoder side of the original Transformer and are highly efficient
at solving classification problems. Even though BERT is a typical example of an autoencoding model,
there are many alternatives discussed in the literature. Let’s take a look at these important alternatives.

Other autoencoding models
In this part, we will review autoencoding model alternatives that slightly modify the original BERT.
These alternative re-implementations aim to get better downstream tasks by exploiting many sources:
optimizing the pretraining process and the number of layers or heads, improving data quality, designing
better objective functions, and so forth. The source of improvements roughly falls into two parts:
better architectural design choice and pretraining control.
Many effective alternatives have been shared lately, so it is impossible to understand and explain them
all here. We can take a look at some of the most cited models in the literature and the most used ones
on NLP benchmarks. Let’s start with A Lite BERT (ALBERT) as a re-implementation of BERT that
focuses especially on architectural design choice.

Introducing ALBERT
The performance of language models is considered to improve as their size gets bigger. However,
training such models is getting more challenging due to both memory limitations and longer training
times. To address these issues, the Google team proposed the ALBERT model, which is indeed a
reimplementation of the BERT architecture by utilizing several new techniques that reduce memory
consumption and increase the training speed. The new design led to the language models scaling
much better than the original BERT. Along with 18 times fewer parameters, ALBERT trains 1.7 times
faster than the original BERT large model.

81

82

Autoencoding Language Models

The ALBERT model mainly consists of three modifications of the original BERT:
• Factorized embedding parameterization
• Cross-layer parameter sharing
• Inter-sentence coherence loss
The first two modifications are parameter-reduction methods that are related to the issue of model size
and memory consumption in the original BERT. The third corresponds to a new objective function:
Sentence-Order Prediction (SOP), replacing the NSP task of the original BERT, which led to a much
thinner model and improved performance.
Factorized embedding parameterization is used to decompose the large vocabulary-embedding matrix
into two smaller matrices. These matrices separate the size of the hidden layers from the size of the
vocabulary. This decomposition reduces the embedding parameters from O(V × H) to O(V × E
+ E × H) where V is vocabulary, H is hidden layer size, and E is embeddings, which leads to more
efficient usage of the total model parameters if H E is satisfied.
For instance, let’s consider the following example: In the ALBERT large model, the value of H is 1026,
and the size of V is 30000. In this case, assuming that the E value is 128, which satisfies the H>>E
condition. The VxH value is approximately 30 M (1026 x 30,000). However, (30,000 × 128 + 128 x
1026) is around 4 M. This leads to a model that is ten times more efficient.
Cross-layer parameter sharing prevents the total number of parameters from increasing as the network
gets deeper. The technique is considered another way to improve parameter efficiency since we can
keep the parameter size smaller by sharing or copying. In the original paper, they experimented with
many ways to share parameters, such as either sharing FF-only parameters across layers or sharing
attention-only parameters or entire parameters.
The other modification of ALBERT is inter-sentence coherence loss. As we already discussed, the
BERT architecture takes advantage of two loss calculations: the MLM loss and NSP. NSP comes with
binary cross-entropy loss for predicting whether or not two segments appear in a row in the original
text. The negative examples are obtained by selecting two segments from different documents.
However, the ALBERT team criticized NSP for being a topic detection problem, which is considered
a relatively easy problem. Therefore, the team proposed a loss based primarily on coherence rather
than topic prediction.
The SOP loss was utilized in this case. This loss function prioritizes the modeling of coherence between
sentences rather than focusing on topic classification. It employs a similar technique to BERT for
positive examples, using two consecutive segments from the same document. For negative examples,
it uses the same two consecutive segments but with their order swapped. This approach enables the
model to learn more nuanced distinctions between coherence properties at the discourse level.

Other autoencoding models

Now, let’s dive into more detail and see how it works in practice:
1.

Let’s compare the original BERT and ALBERT configuration with the Transformers library.
The following piece of code shows how you can configure a BERT-Base initial model. As you
see in the output, the number of parameters is around 110 M:
#BERT-BASE (L=12, H=768, A=12, Total Parameters=110M)
from transformers import BertConfig, BertModel
bert_base= BertConfig()
model = BertModel(bert_base)
print(f"{model.num_parameters() /(10**6)} million parameters")
109.48224 million parameters

2.

The following piece of code shows how you can define the ALBERT model with two classes,
AlbertConfig and AlbertModel, from the Transformers library:
# Albert-base Configuration
from transformers import AlbertConfig, AlbertModel
albert_base = AlbertConfig(hidden_size=768,
    num_attention_heads=12,
    intermediate_size=3072,)
model = AlbertModel(albert_base)
print(f"{model.num_parameters() /(10**6)}\
    million parameters")'
11.683584 million parameters

As a result, the default ALBERT configuration points to Albert-xxlarge. We need to set
the hidden size, the number of attention heads, and the intermediate size to fit the ALBERT
base model. The code shows the ALBERT base model as 11 M, which is 10 times smaller
than the BERT base model. The original paper on ALBERT reported benchmarking as in the
following table:

Figure 3.14 – ALBERT model benchmarking

83

84

Autoencoding Language Models

3.

From this point on, in order to train an ALBERT language model from scratch, we need to go
through similar phases to those we already illustrated in BERT training in the previous section,
titled A deeper look into the BERT language model, by using the uniform Transformers API.
There’s no need to explain the same steps here! Instead, let’s load an already-trained ALBERT
language model as follows:
from transformers import AlbertTokenizer, AlbertModel
tokenizer = \
    AlbertTokenizer.from_pretrained("albert-base-v2")
model = AlbertModel.from_pretrained("albert-base-v2")
text = "The cat is so sad ."
encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='pt')
output = model(**encoded_input)

4.

The preceding pieces of code download the ALBERT model weights and their configuration
from the Hugging Face hub or our local cache directory if already cached, which means you’ve
already called the AlbertTokenizer.from_pretrained() function before. Since the
model object is a pre-trained language model, the things we can do with this model are limited
for now. We need to train it on a downstream task to be able to use it for inference, which will
be the main subject of further chapters. Instead, we can take advantage of its masked language
model objective as follows:
from transformers import pipeline
fillmask= pipeline('fill-mask',
    model='albert-base-v2')
pd.DataFrame(fillmask("The cat is so [MASK] ."))

The following is the output:

Figure 3.15 – The fill-mask output results for albert-base-v2

The fill-mask pipeline computes the scores for each vocabulary token with the softmax() function
and sorts the most probable tokens, where cute is the winner with a probability score of 0.281.
You may notice that entries in the token_str column start with the _ character, which is due to
the metaspace component of the tokenizer of ALBERT.

Other autoencoding models

Let’s take a look at the next alternative, Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach (RoBERTa),
which mostly focuses on the pretraining phase.

RoBERTa
RoBERTa is another popular BERT reimplementation. It has provided many more improvements in
training strategy than architectural design. It outperformed BERT in many tasks on GLUE. Dynamic
masking is one of its original design choices. Although static masking is better for some tasks, the
RoBERTa team showed that dynamic masking can perform well for overall performance. Let’s discuss
the changes made to BERT to get RoBERTa and summarize all of its features.
The changes in architecture are as follows:
• Removing the NSP training objective
• Dynamically changing the masking patterns instead of static masking, which is done by
generating masking patterns whenever they feed a sequence to the model
• BPE sub-word tokenizer
The changes in training are as follows:
• Controlling the training data: More data is used, such as 160 GB instead of the 16 GB
originally used in BERT. Not only the size of the data but the quality and diversity were taken
into consideration in the RoBERTa Model.
• Longer iterations of up to 500 K pretraining steps.
• A longer batch size.
• Longer sequences, which lead to less padding.
• A large 50 K BPE vocabulary instead of a 30 K BPE vocabulary.
Thanks to the Transformers uniform API, as in the preceding ALBERT model pipeline, we initialize
the RoBERTa model as follows:
from transformers import RobertaConfig, RobertaModel
conf= RobertaConfig()
model = RobertaModel(conf)
print(f"{model.num_parameters() /(10**6)} million parameters")
109.48224 million parameters

In order to load the pretrained model, we execute the following pieces of code:
from transformers import RobertaTokenizer, RobertaModel
tokenizer = \
    RobertaTokenizer.from_pretrained('roberta-base')

85

86

Autoencoding Language Models

model = RobertaModel.from_pretrained('roberta-base')
text = "The cat is so sad ."
encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='pt')
output = model(**encoded_input)

These lines illustrate how the model processes a given text. The output representation at the last layer
is not useful at the moment. As we’ve mentioned several times, we need to fine-tune the main language
models. The following execution applies the fill-mask function using the roberta-base model:
from transformers import pipeline
fillmask= pipeline("fill-mask ",model="roberta-base",
    tokenizer=tokenizer)
pd.DataFrame(fillmask("The cat is so <mask> ."))

The following is the output:

Figure 3.16 – The fill-mask task results for roberta-base

Like the previous ALBERT fill-mask model, this pipeline ranks the suitable candidate words. Please
ignore the Ġ prefix in the tokens – that is an encoded space character produced by the byte-level BPE
tokenizer, which we will discuss later. You should have noticed that we used the [MASK] and <mask>
tokens in the ALBERT and RoBERTa pipeline in order to hold the place for a masked token. This is
because of the configuration of the tokenizer. To learn which token expression will be used, you can
check tokenizer.mask_token. Please see the following execution:
tokenizer = AlbertTokenizer.from_pretrained('albert-base-v2')
print(tokenizer.mask_token)
[MASK]
tokenizer = RobertaTokenizer.from_pretrained('roberta-base')
print(tokenizer.mask_token)
<mask>

Other autoencoding models

To ensure proper mask token use, we can add the fillmask.tokenizer.mask_token expression
in the pipeline as follows:
fillmask(f"The cat is very {fillmask.tokenizer.mask_token}.")

In the next section, you will learn more about ELECTRA and how it works.

ELECTRA
The ELECTRA model (proposed by Kevin Clark et al. in 2020) focuses on a new masked language model
utilizing the replaced token detection training objective. During pre-training the model is forced to
learn to distinguish real input tokens from synthetically generated replacements where the synthetic
negative example is sampled from plausible tokens rather than randomly sampled tokens. The ALBERT
model criticized the NSP objective of BERT for being a topic detection problem and using low-quality
negative examples. ELECTRA trains two neural networks, a generator and a discriminator, so that the
former produces high-quality negative examples, whereas the latter distinguishes the original token
from the replaced token. We know GAN networks from the field of computer vision, in which the G
generator produces fake images and tries to fool the D discriminator, and the discriminator network
tries to avoid being fooled. The ELECTRA model applies almost the same generator-discriminator
approach to replace original tokens with high-quality negative examples that are plausible replacements
but synthetically generated.
In order to not repeat the same code with other examples, we only provide a simple fill-mask example
for the ELECTRA generator as follows:
fillmask = \
    pipeline("fill-mask", model="google/electra-small-generator")
fillmask(f"The cat is very \{fillmask.tokenizer.mask_token} .")

You can see the entire list of models at https://huggingface.co/Transformers/
model_summary.html.
The model checkpoints can be found at https://huggingface.co/models.

DeBERTa
When we look at the GLUE and SuperGLUE NLP benchmarks, we can say that the Decoding-Enhanced
BERT with Disentangled Attention (DeBERTa) model has received great attention. It has also given
successful results in many academic and industrial projects recently. The following two techniques of
DeBERTa have an effect on performance:
• Disentangled attention mechanism: This is based on the assumption that the importance of a
word pair is determined by both its content and its relative position. The dependency between
words becomes much stronger when they are used side by side rather than when they are used
in different sentences.

87

88

Autoencoding Language Models

• Enhanced mask decoder: In the softmax layer, the vanilla BERT model decodes masked
words based on aggregated contextual vectors of word contents and position. DeBERTa includes
absolute word position embeddings just before the softmax layer.
DeBERTa is supported by Hugging Face's transformers library, as shown in the following
initialization code:
from transformers import DebertaConfig, DebertaModel
configuration = DebertaConfig()
model = DebertaModel(configuration)
configuration = model.config

Well done! We’ve finally completed the autoencoding model part. Now, we’ll move on to tokenization
algorithms, which have an important effect on the success of Transformers.

Working with tokenization algorithms
In the opening part of the chapter, we trained the BERT model using a specific tokenizer, namely
BertWordPieceTokenizer. Now, it is worth discussing the tokenization process in detail here.
Tokenization is a way of splitting textual input into tokens and assigning an identifier to each token
before feeding the neural network architecture. The most intuitive way to do this is to split the sequence
into smaller chunks in terms of space. However, such approaches do not meet the requirements of some
languages, such as Japanese, and also may lead to huge vocabulary problems. Almost all Transformer
models leverage subword tokenization not only for reducing dimensionality but also for encoding
rare (or unknown) words not seen in training. The tokenization relies on the idea that every word,
including rare words or unknown words, can be decomposed into meaningful smaller chunks that
are widely seen symbols in the training corpus.
Some traditional tokenizers developed within Moses and the nltk library apply advanced rule-based
techniques. However, the tokenization algorithms that are used with Transformers are based on selfsupervised learning and extract the rules from the corpus. Simple intuitive solutions for rule-based
tokenization are based on using characters, punctuation, or whitespace. Character-based tokenization
causes language models to lose the input meaning. Even though it can reduce the vocabulary size,
which is good, it makes it hard for the model to capture the meaning of “cat” by means of the encodings
of the characters “c,” “a,” and “t.” Moreover, the dimension of the input sequence becomes very large.
Likewise, punctuation-based models cannot treat some expressions, such as haven’t or ain’t, properly.
Recently, several advanced subword tokenization algorithms, such as BPE, have become an integral
part of Transformer architectures. These modern tokenization procedures consist of two phases: The
pre-tokenization phase, which simply splits the input into tokens either using space or language-dependent
rules, and the tokenization training phase, which trains the tokenizer and builds a base vocabulary of a

Working with tokenization algorithms

reasonable size based on tokens. Before training our own tokenizers, let’s load a pre-trained tokenizer.
The following code loads a Turkish tokenizer, which is of the BertTokenizerFast type, from the
Transformers library with a vocabulary size of 32 K:
from transformers import AutoModel, AutoTokenizer
tokenizerTUR = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-uncased")
print(f"VOC size is: {tokenizerTUR.vocab_size}")
print(f"The model is: {type(tokenizerTUR)}")
VOC size is: 32000
The model is: Transformers.models.bert.tokenization_bert_fast.
BertTokenizerFast

The following code loads an English BERT tokenizer for the bert-base-uncased model:
from transformers import AutoModel, AutoTokenizer
tokenizerEN = \
    AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")
print(f"VOC size is: {tokenizerEN.vocab_size}")
print(f"The model is {type(tokenizerEN)}")
VOC size is: 30522
The model is ... BertTokenizerFast

Let’s see how they work! We tokenize the word “telecommunication” with these two tokenizers:
word_en="telecommunication"
print(f"is in Turkish Model ? {word_en in tokenizerTUR.vocab}")
print(f"is in English Model ? {word_en in tokenizerEN.vocab}")
is in Turkish Model ? False
is in English Model ? True

The word_en token is already in the vocabulary of the English tokenizer but not in that of the Turkish
one. So, let’s see what happens with the Turkish tokenizer:
tokens=tokenizerTUR.tokenize(word_en)
tokens
['tel', '##eco', '##mm', '##un', '##ica', '##tion']

Since the Turkish tokenizer model has no such a word in its vocabulary, it needs to break the word
into parts that make sense to it. All these split tokens are already stored in the model vocabulary.
Please notice the output of the following execution:
[t in tokenizerTUR.vocab for t in tokens]
[True, True, True, True, True, True]

89

90

Autoencoding Language Models

Let’s tokenize the same word with the English tokenizer that we already loaded:
tokenizerEN.tokenize(word_en)
['telecommunication']

Since the English model has the word “telecommunication” in its base vocabulary, it does not need
to break it into parts but rather takes it as a whole. By learning from the corpus, the tokenizers are
capable of transforming a word into mostly grammatically logical subcomponents. Let’s take a difficult
example from Turkish. As an agglutinative language, Turkish allows us to add many suffixes to a word
stem to construct very long words. Here is one of the longest words in the Turkish language used in
a text (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Longest_word_in_Turkish):
Muvaffakiyetsizleştiricileştiriveremeyebileceklerimizdenmişsinizcesine
It means, “As though you happen to have been from among those whom we will not be able to make
a maker of unsuccessful ones easily/quickly.” The Turkish BERT tokenizer may not have seen this
word in training, but it has seen its pieces; muvaffak (successful) as the stem, iyet (successfulness), siz
(unsuccessfulness), leş (become unsuccessful), and so forth. The Turkish tokenizer extracts components
that seem to be grammatically logical for the Turkish language when comparing the results with a
Wikipedia article:
print(tokenizerTUR.tokenize(long_word_tur))
['muvaffak', '##iyet', '##siz', '##les', '##tir', '##ici', '##les',
'##tir', '##iver', '##emeye', '##bilecekleri', '##mi', '##z', '##den',
'##mis', '##siniz', '##cesine']

The Turkish tokenizer is an example of the WordPiece algorithm since it works with a BERT model.
Almost all language models, including BERT, DistilBERT, and ELECTRA, require a WordPiece tokenizer.
Now, we are ready to take a look at the tokenization approaches used with Transformers. First, we’ll
discuss the widely used tokenization of BPE, WordPiece, and SentencePiece a bit, and then
train them with Hugging Face’s fast tokenizers library.

BPE
BPE is a data compression technique. It scans the data sequence and iteratively replaces the most
frequent pair of bytes with a single symbol. It was first adapted and proposed in Neural Machine
Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units (Sennrich et al. 2015), to solve the problem of unknown
words and rare words for machine translation. Currently, it is successfully being used within GPT-2
and many other state-of-the-art models. Many modern tokenization algorithms are based on such
compression techniques.

Working with tokenization algorithms

It represents text as a sequence of character n-grams, which are also called character-level subwords.
The training starts initially with a vocabulary of all Unicode characters (or symbols) seen in the
corpus. This can be small for English but can be large for character-rich languages such as Japanese.
Then, it iteratively computes character bigrams and replaces the most frequent ones with special new
symbols. For example, t and h are frequently occurring symbols. We replace consecutive symbols with
the th symbol. This process is kept iteratively running until the vocabulary has attained the desired
vocabulary size. The most common vocabulary size is around 30 K.
BPE is particularly effective at representing unknown words. However, it may not guarantee the handling
of rare words and/or words including rare subwords. In such cases, it associates rare characters with
a special symbol, <UNK>, which may lead to losing meaning in words a bit. As a potential solution,
byte-level BPE (BBPE) has been proposed, which uses a 256-byte set of vocabulary instead of Unicode
characters to ensure that every base character is included in the vocabulary.

WordPiece tokenization
WordPiece is another popular word segmentation algorithm widely used with BERT, DistilBERT,
and ELECTRA. It was proposed by Schuster and Nakajima to solve the Japanese and Korean voice
problem in 2012. The motivation behind this work was that, although not a big issue for the English
language, word segmentation is important preprocessing for many Asian languages, because in these
languages spaces are rarely used. Therefore, we come across word segmentation approaches in NLP
studies in Asian languages more often. Similar to BPE, WordPiece uses a large corpus to learn vocabulary
and merging rules. While BPE and BBPE learn the merging rules based on co-occurrence statistics,
the WordPiece algorithm uses maximum likelihood estimation to extract the merging rules from a
corpus. It first initializes the vocabulary with Unicode characters, which are also called vocabulary
symbols. It treats each word in the training corpus as a list of symbols (initially Unicode characters),
and then it iteratively produces a new symbol merging two symbols out of all the possible candidate
symbol pairs based on the likelihood maximization rather than frequency. This production pipeline
continues until the desired vocabulary size is reached.

Sentence piece tokenization
Previous tokenization algorithms treat text as a space-separated word list. This space-based splitting
does not work in some languages. In the German language, compound nouns are written without
spaces, for example, “Menschenrechte” (human rights). The solution is to use language-specific
pre-tokenizers. In German, an NLP pipeline leverages a compound-splitter module to check whether
a word can be subdivided into smaller words. However, East Asian languages (for example, Chinese,
Japanese, Korean, and Thai) do not use spaces between words. The SentencePiece algorithm is
designed to overcome this space limitation, which is a simple and language-independent tokenizer
proposed by Kudo et al. in 2018. It treats the input as a raw input stream where space is part of the
character set. The tokenizer using SentencePiece produces the _ character, which is also why
we saw _ in the output of the ALBERT model example earlier. Other popular language models that
use SentencePiece are XLNet, Marian, and T5.

91

92

Autoencoding Language Models

So far, we have discussed subword tokenization approaches. It is time to start conducting experiments
for training with the tokenizers library.

The tokenizers library
You may have noticed that the already-trained tokenizers for Turkish and English are part of the
Transformers library in the previous code examples. On the other hand, the Hugging Face team provided
the tokenizers library independently from the Transformers library to be fast and give us more
freedom. The library was originally written in Rust, which makes multi-core parallel computations
possible, and is wrapped in Python (https://github.com/huggingface/tokenizers).
To install the tokenizers library, we use this:
$ pip install tokenizers

The tokenizers library provides several components so that we can build an end-to-end tokenizer
from preprocessing the raw text to decoding tokenized unit IDs:
Normalizer→ PreTokenizer → Modeling → Post-Processor → Decoding
The following diagram depicts the tokenization pipeline:

Figure 3.17 – Tokenization pipeline

This pipeline can be explained as follows:
• The normalizer allows us to apply primitive text processing such as lowercasing, stripping,
Unicode normalization, and removing accents.
• The PreTokenizer prepares the corpus for the next training phase. It splits the input into tokens
depending on the rules, such as whitespace.

Working with tokenization algorithms

• Model training is a subword tokenization algorithm such as BPE, BBPE, and WordPiece, which
we’ve discussed already. It discovers subwords/vocabulary and learns generation rules.
• Post-processing provides advanced class construction that is compatible with Transformers
models such as BertProcessors. We mostly add special tokens such as [CLS] and [SEP] to
the tokenized input just before feeding the architecture.
• The decoder is in charge of converting token IDs back to the original string. It is just for
inspecting what is going on.
Let’s see how you can train a BPE-based tokenizer.

Training BPE
Let’s train a BPE tokenizer using Shakespeare’s plays:
1.

It is loaded as follows:
import nltk
from nltk.corpus import gutenberg
nltk.download('gutenberg')
nltk.download('punkt')
plays=['shakespeare-macbeth.txt','shakespeare-hamlet.txt',
    'shakespeare-caesar.txt']
shakespeare=[" ".join(s) for ply in plays \
    for s in gutenberg.sents(ply)]

We will need a post-processor (TemplateProcessing) for all the tokenization algorithms
ahead. We need to customize the post-processor to make the input convenient for a particular
language model. For example, the following template will be suitable for the BERT model
since it needs the [CLS] token at the beginning of the input and [SEP] tokens both at the
end and in the middle.
2.

We define the template as follows:
from tokenizers.processors import TemplateProcessing
special_tokens=["[UNK]","[CLS]","[SEP]","[PAD]","[MASK]"]
temp_proc= TemplateProcessing(
    single="[CLS] $A [SEP]",
    pair="[CLS] $A [SEP] $B:1 [SEP]:1",
    special_tokens=[
        ("[CLS]", special_tokens.index("[CLS]")),
        ("[SEP]", special_tokens.index("[SEP]")),
    ],
)

93

94

Autoencoding Language Models

3.

We import the necessary components to build an end-to-end tokenization pipeline:
from tokenizers import Tokenizer
from tokenizers.normalizers import (
    Sequence,Lowercase, NFD, StripAccents)
from tokenizers.pre_tokenizers import Whitespace
from tokenizers.models import BPE
from tokenizers.decoders import BPEDecoder

4.

We start by instantiating BPE as follows:
tokenizer = Tokenizer(BPE())

5.

The preprocessing part has two components: normalizer and pre-tokenizer. We may
have more than one normalizer. So, we compose a sequence of normalizer components that
includes multiple normalizers where NFD() is a Unicode normalizer and StripAccents()
removes accents. For pre-tokenization, Whitespace() gently breaks the text based on space.
Since the decoder component must be compatible with the model, BPEDecoder is selected
for the BPE model:
tokenizer.normalizer = Sequence(
    [NFD(),Lowercase(),StripAccents()])
tokenizer.pre_tokenizer = Whitespace()
tokenizer.decoder = BPEDecoder()
tokenizer.post_processor=temp_proc

6.

We are now ready to train the tokenizer on the data. The following execution instantiates
BpeTrainer(), which helps us to organize the entire training process by setting hyperparameters.
We set the vocabulary size parameter to 5000 since our Shakespeare corpus is relatively
small. For a large-scale project, we use a bigger corpus and normally set the vocabulary size
to around 30 K:
from tokenizers.trainers import BpeTrainer
trainer = BpeTrainer(vocab_size=5000,
    special_tokens= special_tokens)
tokenizer.train_from_iterator(shakespeare, trainer=trainer)
print(f"Trained vocab size:{tokenizer.get_vocab_size()}" )
Trained vocab size: 5000

We have completed the training!

Working with tokenization algorithms

Note
Training from the filesystem: To start the training process, we passed an in-memory Shakespeare
object as a list of strings to tokenizer.train_from_iterator(). For a large-scale
project with a large corpus, we need to design a Python generator that yields string lines mostly
by consuming the files from the filesystem rather than in-memory storage. You should also
check tokenizer.train() to train from the filesystem storage as applied in the preceding
BERT training section.
7.

Let’s grab a random sentence from Macbeth, name it sen, and tokenize it with our fresh tokenizer:
sen= "Is this a dagger which I see before me, \
    the handle toward my hand?"
sen_enc=tokenizer.encode(sen)
print(f"Output: {format(sen_enc.tokens)}")
Output: ['[CLS]', 'is', 'this', 'a', 'dagger', 'which', 'i',
'see', 'before', 'me', ',', 'the', 'hand', 'le', 'toward', 'my',
'hand', '?', '[SEP]']

8.

Thanks to the preceding post-processor function, we see additional [CLS] and [SEP] tokens
in the proper position. There is only one split word, handle (hand, le), since we passed to the
model a sentence from Macbeth that the model already knew. Besides, we used a small corpus,
and the tokenizer is not forced to use compression. Let’s pass a challenging phrase, “Hugging
Face,” that the tokenizer might not know:
sen_enc2=tokenizer.encode("Macbeth and Hugging Face")
print(f"Output: {format(sen_enc2.tokens)}")
Output: ['[CLS]', 'macbeth', 'and', 'hu', 'gg', 'ing', 'face',
'[SEP]']

9.

The term “Hugging” is lower case and split into three pieces hu, gg, and ing, since the model
vocabulary contains all other tokens but Hugging. Let’s pass two sentences now:
two_enc=tokenizer.encode("I like Hugging Face!",
    "He likes Macbeth!")
print(f"Output: {format(two_enc.tokens)}")
Output: ['[CLS]', 'i', 'like', 'hu', 'gg', 'ing', 'face', '!',
'[SEP]', 'he', 'li', 'kes', 'macbeth', '!', '[SEP]']

Notice that the post-processor injected the [SEP] token as an indicator.
10. It is time to save the model. We can either save the sub-word tokenization model or the entire
tokenization pipeline. First, let’s save the BPE model only:
tokenizer.model.save('.')
['./vocab.json', './merges.txt']

95

96

Autoencoding Language Models

11. The model saved two files regarding vocabulary and merging rules. The merge.txt file is
composed of 4,948 merging rules:
$ wc -l ./merges.txt
4948 ./merges.txt

12. The top five rules ranked are as shown in the following where we see that [t, h] is the first
ranked rule due to that being the most frequent pair. For testing, the model scans the textual
input and tries to merge these two symbols first if applicable:
$ head -3 ./merges.txt
#version: 0.2 - Trained by `huggingface/tokenizers`
t h
o u
a n
th e
r e

13. The BPE algorithm ranks the rules based on frequency. When you manually calculate character
bigrams in the Shakespeare corpus, you will find [t, h] the most frequent pair.
14. Let’s now save and load the entire tokenization pipeline:
tokenizer.save("MyBPETokenizer.json")
tokenizerFromFile =\
    Tokenizer.from_file("MyBPETokenizer.json")
sen_enc3 = \
    tokenizerFromFile.encode("I like Hugging Face and Macbeth")
print(f"Output: {format(sen_enc3.tokens)}")
Output: ['[CLS]', 'i', 'like', 'hu', 'gg', 'ing', 'face', 'and',
'macbeth', '[SEP]']

We successfully reloaded the tokenizer!

Training the WordPiece model
In this section, we will train the WordPiece model:
1.

We start by importing the necessary modules:
from tokenizers.models import WordPiece
from tokenizers.decoders import WordPiece \
as WordPieceDecoder
from tokenizers.normalizers import BertNormalizer

Working with tokenization algorithms

2.

The following lines instantiate an empty WordPiece tokenizer and prepare it for training.
BertNormalizer is a pre-defined normalizer sequence that includes the processes of cleaning
the text, transforming accents, handling Chinese characters, and lowercasing:
tokenizer = Tokenizer(WordPiece())
tokenizer.normalizer=BertNormalizer()
tokenizer.pre_tokenizer = Whitespace()
tokenizer.decoder= WordPieceDecoder()

3.

Now, we instantiate a proper trainer, WordPieceTrainer() for WordPiece(), to
organize the training process:
from tokenizers.trainers import WordPieceTrainer
trainer = WordPieceTrainer(vocab_size=5000,\
    special_tokens=["[UNK]","[CLS]","[SEP]","[PAD]","[MASK]"])
tokenizer.train_from_iterator(shakespeare, trainer=trainer)
output = tokenizer.encode(sen)
print(output.tokens)
['is', 'this', 'a', 'dagger', 'which', 'i', 'see', 'before',
'me', ',', 'the', 'hand', '##le', 'toward', 'my', 'hand', '?']

4.

Let’s use WordPieceDecoder() to treat the sentences properly:
tokenizer.decode(output.ids)
'is this a dagger which i see before me, the handle toward my
hand?'

5.

We have not come across any [UNK] tokens in the output since the tokenizer somehow knows
or splits the input for encoding. Let’s force the model to produce [UNK] tokens as in the
following code. Let’s pass a Turkish sentence to our tokenizer:
tokenizer.encode("Kralsın aslansın Macbeth!").tokens
'[UNK]', '[UNK]', 'macbeth', '!']

Well done! We have a couple of unknown tokens since the tokenizer does not find a way to decompose
the given word from the merging rules and the base vocabulary.
So far, we have designed our tokenization pipeline all the way from the normalizer component to
the decoder component. On the other hand, the tokenizers library provides us with an already
made (not trained) empty tokenization pipeline with proper components to build quick prototypes
for production. Here are some pre-made tokenizers:
• CharBPETokenizer: The original BPE
• ByteLevelBPETokenizer: The byte-level version of the BPE

97

98

Autoencoding Language Models

• SentencePieceBPETokenizer: A BPE implementation compatible with the one used
by SentencePiece
• BertWordPieceTokenizer: The famous BERT tokenizer, using WordPiece
The following code imports these pipelines:
from tokenizers import (ByteLevelBPETokenizer,
    CharBPETokenizer,
    SentencePieceBPETokenizer,
    BertWordPieceTokenizer)

All these pipelines are already designed for us. The rest of the process (such as training, saving the
model, and using the tokenizer) is the same as our previous BPE and WordPiece training procedures.
Well done! We have made great progress and trained our first Transformer model as well as its tokenizer.

Summary
In this chapter, we have experienced autoencoding models both theoretically and practically. Starting
with learning the basics of BERT, we trained it as well as a corresponding tokenizer from scratch. We
also discussed how to work inside other frameworks, such as Keras. Besides BERT, we also reviewed
other autoencoding models such as ALBERT, RoBERTa, ELECTRA, and DeBERTa. To avoid excessive
code repetition, we did not provide the full implementation for training other models. During the
BERT training, we trained the WordPiece tokenization algorithm. In the last part, we examined
other tokenization algorithms since it is worth discussing and understanding all of them as different
Transformer architectures utilize different tokenization algorithms.
Autoencoding models use the left decoder side of the original Transformer and are mostly fine-tuned
for classification problems. In the next chapter, we will discuss and learn about the right decoder part
of Transformers to implement language generation models.

4
From Generative Models
to Large Language Models
In this chapter, you will learn about Generative Language Models (GLMs) and Large Language
Model (LLMs). After this, you will learn how to pre-train any language model, such as Generated
Pre-trained Transformer 2 (GPT-2), on your own text and use it for tasks such as Natural Language
Generation (NLG). You will learn the basics of Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer (T5) models,
conduct a hands-on multitask learning experiment with T5, and train a Multilingual T5 (mT5) model
on your own Machine Translation (MT) data. After finishing this chapter, you will have an overview
of GLMs and their various use cases in text2text applications, such as summarization, paraphrasing,
multitask learning, zero-shot learning, and MT.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Working with GLMs
• Working with text-to-text models
• AR language model training
• GLM training
• NLG using AR models

Technical requirements
The following libraries/packages are required to successfully complete this chapter:
• Anaconda
• transformers 4.0.0
• pytorch 1.0.2
• tensorflow 2.4.0

100

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

• SimpleT5 0.1.4
• datasets 2.10.0
• tokenizers
All notebooks with coding exercises will be available at the Book GitHub page at https://github.
com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

An introduction to GLMs
While Autoencoder (AE) language models, such as Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT), are purely based on the encoder part of transformers and are well-suited for
classification problems, generative models are either encoder-decoder or decoder-only models. GLMs
were originally intended for language generation tasks such as MT or text summarization, but we can
see different successful use cases used by GLMs.
AE models are particularly effective for classification tasks, such as text classification and sentiment
analysis, as well as token-level tasks such as named entity recognition (NER) or part-of-speech (POS)
tagging. Here, AE models simply perform classification by mapping either the special CLS token at
the beginning of the sentence or the individual tokens at any position to the predefined class labels.
On the other hand, although GLMs have been widely used for language generation tasks, they have
also been successfully used for classification tasks recently.
GLMs are pre-trained using one of two objectives: either a causal language modeling objective, which
allows the model to predict the next word in a sequence (for example, GPT-3 or PaLM), or a denoising
objective, where the model learns to restore the original sentence from a corrupted one (such as T5
and BART). While the former purely relies on the decoder part of the transformers, also called Auto
Regressive (AR) model, the latter uses both encoder-decoder parts of the transformers, also called
text-to-text or seq-to-seq model.
These models are commonly used in tasks such as MT, dialog systems, and text summarization.
An interesting feature that emerges here is that it is possible to use generated text for classification
purposes mostly solved by Encoder-only models. However, the reverse is not true. We could not use
Encoder-only models for generation. For instance, it is nearly impossible to translate a text with BERT.
Controlling the textual output of the generative models is crucial for preventing issues such as toxic
text generation and model hallucinations during problem-solving. By controlling the output, we can
easily use GLMs for classification tasks. The critical trick is to express tasks as instructions. Here are
some examples:

An introduction to GLMs

Task

Input Template

Possible Textual Output

Sentiment Analysis

input text + “what is the sentiment?”

“it is positive”
“it is negative”

Text Classification

input text + “what is the text about?”

“it is about the economy”
“it is about health”.

Text Regression

Input text + “Can you rate the sentence quality “it is 3.0”
on a scale of 1-5?”
“it is 1.0”

NER

“... John … Paris …” + prompt

“Paris is a city entity”
“John is a person entity”

Table 4.1 – Prompting for tasks

A piece of text called a prompt is added to the input so that the model is directed toward the desired target.
Thanks to the generation capacity of LLMs and prompting (we will discuss prompting in detail in later
chapters), generative models approach any task as a text-to-text problem, which leads to successful
solutions. This approach provides the opportunity to apply multi-task learning very easily since we
can handle diverse tasks in the same batch. We can map many tasks into a single structure, which
is text-to-text. Major language models such as GPT-3, PaLM, and ChatGPT—which are currently
popular—take advantage of this generative feature. We will also discuss LLMs in Chapter 10.
A notable example of using GLMs and instruction-based multi-task learning is the FLAN framework.
The framework was able to model 1,800 different instruction fine-tuning tasks simultaneously without
changing the model’s architecture. By scaling (the initial proposal used LaMDA 137B) the model to
the 540-billion-parameter language model (PaLM) and scaling (the initial task size was 62) to 1,800
tasks, the model can be successful even in tasks that are unaware of its existence during training,
which is called zero-shot learning. Thanks to such generative models, which allow scaling up in this
direction, it is not surprising that we encounter fascinating applications every day.
It is also important to note that prompt engineering as we see it today will vanish in time. We have seen
many research articles that aim to find the most effective prompts. However, with advancements in
instruction fine-tuning, we are getting closer to having more and more natural instructions. ChatGPT
is a fantastic example of these advancements. Instruction capability of ChatGPT (the GPT-3.5 and
davinci-003 models) have shown that a better understanding of instructions and a greater ability to
follow them by the model can lead to many new features. You might have seen many people working
with these fine-tuned models and creating great tools such as conversational question-answering systems.
But (at the time this book was being written) some problems still exist. LLMs still suffer from
hallucination, and much research is being conducted to solve this issue. Sometimes, even if you
provide a nice and well-written context and ask a question about it (Open Book Question Answering
or OBQA), you will be welcomed by a hallucinated answer. It is very important to use such tools, but
it is more important to know their problems as well.

101

102

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Working with GLMs
The Transformer architecture was originally intended to be effective for text-to-text tasks such as MT
and summarization, but it has been used in diverse NLP problems, ranging from token classification
to coreference resolution. Subsequent works began to use the left and right parts of the architecture
separately and more creatively. Other than next-word prediction, some denoising objectives are also
utilized to fully recover the original input from corrupted or truncated input.
While text-to-text models such as T5 use both encoder and decoder parts, decoder-only models
such as GPT uses only decoder part. Decoder-only AR prevents the model from accessing words to
the right of the current word in a forward direction (or to the left of the current word in a backward
direction), which is called unidirectionality.
GPT and its successors (GPT-2, GPT-3, InstructGPT (a.k.a GPT-3.5), and ChatGPT), Transformer-XL,
and XLNet are some of the popular decoder-only AR models in the literature. Even though XLNet
is based on autoregression, it somehow managed to make use of both contextual sides of the word
in a bidirectional fashion, with the help of the permutation-based language objective. Now, we start
introducing them and show how to train the models with a variety of experiments. Let’s look at GPTs first.

GPT model family
AR models are made up of multiple decoder blocks of transformers. Each block contains a masked
multi-head self-attention layer along with a pointwise feed-forward layer. The activation in the final
transformer block is fed into a SoftMax function that produces the word probability distributions
over an entire vocabulary of words to predict the next word. Notable examples are mostly from Open
AI’s GPT model family.
In the original GPT paper Improving Language Understanding by Generative Pre-Training (2018), the
authors addressed several bottlenecks that traditional ML-based NLP pipelines are subject to. For
example, firstly, traditional pipelines require both a massive amount of task-specific data and taskspecific architecture. Secondly, it is hard to apply task-aware input transformations with minimal
changes to the architecture of the pre-trained model. The original GPT and its successors (GPT-2
and GPT-3), designed by the OpenAI team, have focused on these problems and their solutions to
alleviate these bottlenecks. The major contribution of the original GPT study is that the pre-trained
model achieved satisfactory results, not only for a single task but diverse tasks, which is called multitask learning. Having learned the generative model from unlabeled data, which is self-supervised
pre-training, the model is simply fine-tuned to a downstream task (or multiple tasks) with a relatively
small amount of task-specific data, which is called supervised fine-tuning (SFT). This two-stage
scheme is widely used in other transformer models as well, where self-supervised pre-training is
followed by supervised fine-tuning.

Working with GLMs

GPT models showed us that GLMs can solve zero-shot task generalization problems by relying
specifically on multi-task learning. To make multi-task learning feasible, the GPT architecture is
kept as generic as possible: only the inputs are transformed in a task-specific manner, while the entire
architecture is kept exactly the same. This approach converts the textual input into a suitable format
for the task so that the pre-trained model can understand the task from it. The left part of Figure 4.1
(from the original paper) illustrates the Transformers architecture and training objectives used in
the original GPT work. The right side shows how to transform input for fine-tuning on several tasks.
To put it simply, for a single-sequence task such as text classification, the input is passed through the
network as-is, and the linear layer takes the last activations to make a decision. For sentence-pair tasks
such as textual entailment, the input that is made up of two sequences is marked with a delimiter,
shown as the second example in Figure 4.1. In both scenarios, the architecture sees uniform token
sequences being processed by the pre-trained model. The delimiter used in this transformation helps
the pre-trained model to know which part is the premise and the hypothesis in the case of textual
entailment. Thanks to input transformation, we do not have to make substantial changes in the
architecture across the tasks.
You can see a representation of input transformation here:

Figure 4.1 – Input transformation (from the original paper)

The GPT and its successors have mainly focused on achieving a particular architectural design that
eliminates the need for a fine-tuning phase. This is based on the idea that a model can learn a great
deal about a language in the pre-training phase, leaving little work to be done during fine-tuning.
During inference, the model is given a text as well as a few examples of tasks as input. In some cases,
such as zero-shot learning, no examples are provided at all.

103

104

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Successors of the original GPTs
The popular ChatGPT, as the names suggest, is based on GPT, which was developed by the OpenAI
team. Along the way, the team designed several other models, including GPT2, GPT3, InstructGPT,
and ChatGPT.
GPT-2 (see the paper Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners, 2019), a successor to the
original GPT called WebText, is a larger model than GPT and was trained on much more training
data than the original one. GPT-2 achieved better results on seven out of the eight tasks in a zero-shot
setting in which there was no fine-tuning applied but had limited success in some other tasks. The idea
behind the GPT-2 is that language models mostly need self-supervised pre-training. Although the
ideas behind the model were very valuable, the performance was not very good. However, it worked
surprisingly well in some cases. Researchers pursued this approach because they realized that this
zero-shot/few-shot learning idea could be applied by scaling some aspects of training process. They
saw that a task-agnostic model could be trained on a huge and diverse dataset.
Since they had seen that the zero and few-shot capabilities of language models substantially improved
by scaling up the model size, the dataset size, and the task size in multi-tasking, the OpenAI team
trained the GPT-3 model (see the paper Language models are few-shot learners, 2020) with 175
billion parameters, which is 100 times bigger than GPT-2. The study showed that scaling up models
substantially improves task-agnostic and few-shot learning performance.
The architectures of GPT-2 are GPT-3 are similar, with the main differences usually being in the model
size, diverse tasks, and the dataset quantity/quality. Due to the massive amount of data in the dataset
and the large number of parameters it is trained on, it achieved better results on many downstream
tasks in zero-shot, one-shot, and few-shot (such as K=32 shots) settings without any gradient-based
fine-tuning. The team showed that the model performance increased as the parameter size and
the number of examples increased for many tasks, including translation, question answering, and
masked-token tasks.
One of the main problems of GLMs is the potential for generating toxic information. In response
to concerns about toxic language and misinformation, the team introduced a new approach called
InstructGPT as another extension of the GPT model family. To enhance the safety and usefulness of
the model, the team employed a technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) to refine GPT-3. In comparison to GPT-3, the InstructGPT model demonstrates an improved
ability to comprehend and execute instructions expressed in natural language. Furthermore, it exhibits
a reduced likelihood of generating false or harmful information.
The OpenAI team has developed a three-step process for InstructGPT. The initial step involves finetuning the model, followed by the creation of a reward model (RM). The third and final step is to take
the supervised fine-tuning model and refine it further using reinforcement learning. One advantage
of InstructGPT is its strong alignment with human intention. This is achieved through the utilization
of a reinforcement learning framework, which enables it to learn from human feedback. It is said that
Popular ChatGPT is based on InstructionGPT, but we have not seen any documentation about how
ChatGPT has been trained yet.

Working with GLMs

Transformer-XL
Another important generative model is Transformer-XL. The author of the model stated that
Transformer models suffer from the fixed-length context due to a lack of recurrence in the initial
design and context fragmentation, although they are capable of learning long-term dependencies.
Most transformers break down documents into a list of fixed-length (mostly 512) segments, where
any information flow across segments is not possible. Consequently, the language models are not
able to capture long-term dependencies beyond this fixed-length limit. Moreover, the segmentation
procedure builds the segments without paying attention to sentence boundaries. A segment can be
absurdly made up of the second half of a sentence and the first half of its successor, hence the language
models can miss the necessary contextual information when predicting the next token. This problem
is referred to as the context fragmentation problem in the literature.
To address and overcome these issues, the Transformer-XL authors (see the paper Transformer-XL:
Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context, 2019) proposed a new transformer
architecture that includes a segment-level recurrence mechanism and a new positional encoding
scheme. This approach inspired many subsequent models. The largest possible dependency length
that the model can attend is limited by the number of layers and segment lengths.

XLNet
Masked Language Modeling (MLM) has dominated the pre-training phase of encoder-only transformer
architectures. However, it has faced criticism in the past since the masked tokens are present in
the pre-training phase but are absent during the fine-tuning phase, which leads to a discrepancy
between pre-training and fine-tuning. Because of this absence, the model may not be able to use all
of the information learned during the pre-training phase. XLNet (see the paper XLNet: Generalized
Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding, 2019) replaces MLM with Permuted Language
Modeling (PLM), which is a random permutation of the input tokens to overcome this bottleneck.
The permutation language modeling makes each token position utilize contextual information from
all positions, leading to capturing bidirectional context. The objective function only permutes the
factorization order and defines the order of token predictions, but doesn’t change the natural positions
of sequences. Briefly, the model chooses some tokens as targets after permutation, and it then tries to
predict them conditioned on the remaining tokens and the natural positions of the targets. It makes
it possible to use an AR model in a bidirectional fashion.
XLNet takes advantage of both AE and AR models. It is, indeed, a generalized AR model. Besides its
objective function, XLNet is made up of two important mechanisms: it integrates the segment-level
recurrence mechanism of Transformer-XL into its framework, and it includes the careful design of
the two-stream attention mechanism for target-aware representations.
Let’s discuss those models using both parts of the Transformers in the next section.

105

106

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Working with text-to-text models
The left encoder and the right decoder parts of the transformer are connected with cross-attention,
which helps each decoder layer attends over the final encoder layer, which means it exploits encoded
information accumulated at the encoder layer. This naturally pushes models toward producing output
that is closely tied to the original input. The following are popular text-to-text models that keep the
encoder and decoder part of the transformer:
• T5: Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer
• BART: Bidirectional and Auto-Regressive Transformer
• PEGASUS: Pre-training with Extracted Gap-sentences for Abstractive Summarization
Sequence-to-Sequence models
Let’s begin to understand and work with T5.

Multi-task learning with T5
Most NLP architectures, ranging from Word2Vec to transformers, learn embeddings and other
parameters by predicting the masked words using context (neighbor) words. We treat NLP problems
as word prediction problems. While some text-to-text models purely rely on next-word prediction,
some, such as T5 and BART, exploit denoising objectives, which maximize the model capacity in
terms of reconstructing randomly corrupted text. That is, the model is trained to predict missing
or corrupted tokens in the input. T5 (see the paper Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a
Unified Text-to-Text Transformer, 2019) emphasized this point, and the authors developed their own
objective function based on it. But the main contribution of T5 is its capacity for multi-task learning
by rephrasing the task as instruction.
T5 proposed a unifying framework to solve many tasks under the same structure. The idea underlying
T5 is to rephrase all NLP tasks to a text-to-text (Seq2Seq) problem where both input and output are
a list of tokens. Transformers have been found to be useful in applying the same model to diverse
NLP tasks, as seen in GPT-3, from question answering to text summarization, which enables us to
employ multi-task training.
The following diagram, which is inspired by the original paper, shows how T5 solves many (four in this
figure) different NLP tasks—MT, linguistic acceptability, semantic similarity, and summarization—
within a unified framework:

Working with text-to-text models

Figure 4.2 – The T5 framework

The T5 model roughly follows the original encoder-decoder transformer model. The modifications
are done in the layer normalization, denoising objective function, and position embedding scheme.
Instead of using sinusoidal positional embedding or learned embedding, T5 uses relative positional
embedding, which is becoming more common in transformer architectures.
T5 casts tasks into a text-to-text format. The model is fed with text that is made up of a task prefix
and the input attached to it. We convert a labeled textual dataset to a {'inputs': '....',
'targets': ...'} format, where we insert the purpose in the input as a prefix. Then, we train
the model with labeled data so that it learns what to do and how to do it. As shown in the preceding
diagram, for the English-German translation task, the "translate English to German:
That is good." input is going to produce "das is gut.". Likewise, any input with a
"summarize:" prefix will be summarized by the model.
It should be noted that the T5 model is not designed for task-agnostic purposes. In the next subsection,
we will discuss how to modify it to become task-agnostic, which is referred to as T0.

Multi-task training with T5
Now, let’s take a simple look at how to apply multi-task training in a T5 architecture with the
SimpleT5 library. To fully understand and address multitask learning, we’ll start with a proof-ofconcept (PoC). Our PoC will be an exercise that’s focused on determining whether the multi-tasking
idea can be turned into a reality. But it is important to explore all potential implications, of course. To
start, model selection, datasets, and task diversity will be kept as simple as possible. We will use two
different datasets: the glue-sst2 dataset for sentiment analysis and the opus_en-de (EnglishGerman) machine translation dataset from the Opus project.

107

108

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

NLP libraries
In this book, we are using various sources and libraries so you can experience different
infrastructures. In this way, we will learn about a lot of open-source software. We circulate
them for the community. For example, we will now use the SimpleT5 library for multi-task
training. In the next subsection, we will train T5 with the simpletransformer library for
MT. They are both built on top of Hugging Face’s Transformers library.
First, let’s install the necessary libraries:
pip install simpleT5 datasets

For now, let’s download the small checkpoint of the T5 model so that we can do faster training. But
please, do not forget that we need bigger models to improve performance for real production. This is
especially crucial for few-shot problems.
from simplet5 import SimpleT5
model = SimpleT5()
model.from_pretrained("t5","t5-small")

Now, we will use the datasets library to load the datasets and prepare them for modeling.
As SimpleT5 requires a pandas DataFrame and for the column names to be [source_text,
target_text], we renamed the columns within our pandas DataFrame. We take only the first
1,000 sentences for quick prototyping. Once you have successfully trained the model, you should/can
use the entire dataset to improve the accuracy!
import pandas as pd
from datasets import load_dataset
sst2_df =pd.DataFrame(
    load_dataset("glue",
        "sst2",
        split="train[:1000]"))
sst2_df=sst2_df[["sentence","label"]]
sst2_df.columns= ["source_text","target_text"]

Now we will use prompts to rephrase the tasks so they are suitable for text-to-text. We add the
instruction “What is the sentiment? Good or Bad?” to the source sentence. Likewise, we set suitable
tokens "Good" and "Bad" for 1 and 0 for the target text as follows:
prompt_sentiment=". What is the sentiment ? "\
    +"Good or Bad ?"
sst2_df["source_text"]= sst2_df\
    .source_text\
    .apply(lambda x: x +prompt_sentiment)

Working with text-to-text models

sst2_df["target_text"]=sst2_df\
    .target_text\
    .apply(lambda x:"Good" if x==1 else "Bad")

We will make a similar arrangement in the MT dataset to fit the text-to-text template. Let’s load only
1,000 instances from the opus en-de dataset first. Notice that we set source and target as
English and German respectively to apply English-to-German translation:
opus=load_dataset("opus100","de-en", split="train[:1000]")
opus_df=pd.DataFrame(opus)
opus_df["source_text"]=opus_df.apply(
    lambda x: x.translation["en"], axis=1)
opus_df["target_text"]=opus_df.apply(
    lambda x: x.translation["de"], axis=1)
opus_df= opus_df[["source_text","target_text"]]

The prompt that we add at the end of the sentences is "Translate English to German",
as follows:
prompt_tr=". Translate English to German"
opus_df["source_text"]= opus_df\
    .source_text\
    .apply(lambda x: x +prompt_tr)

Our two tasks are ready for training. We merge and shuffle them:
merge= opus_df.append(sst2_df).sample(frac=1.0)
merge.head(5)

Figure 4.3 — Two different NLP tasks in one seq-2-seq format

109

110

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Finally, we have two tasks in one bag in the form of seq-2-seq. We take 1,800 instances for training
and 200 for testing:
train_df=merge[:1800]
eval_df= merge[1800:]

Thanks to the SimpleT5 framework, the training is very simple. We keep the source token length as
512, which is longer than the target length, 128:
model.train(train_df=train_df,
    eval_df=eval_df,
    source_max_token_len = 512,
    target_max_token_len = 128,
    batch_size = 8,
    max_epochs = 3,
    use_gpu = True,
    precision = 32)

Once the training is successfully completed, we can experience the application of multi-task learning
with inference. Now we will take the same sentence, "The cats are fun!", for both sentiment
analysis and MT using the appropriate prompt.
Let’s start with sentiment by just adding a sentiment prompt to the sentence:
import torch
model.device= torch.device("cpu")
a_sentence="The cats are fun!"
model.predict(a_sentence+ prompt_sentiment)
Output:['Good']

The output is "Good", which is the correct label. But the important thing at this point is that the
model understood what the task is. T5 checkpoints (T5-small, T5-base or T5-large) have been already
pre-trained with different tasks. So, they have the potential to misunderstand the tasks. We can say now
that we have correctly guided the model with prompting. We do not care now if the model classifies
perfectly or not. Thus, we do not evaluate the model’s performance.
Now, change the instruction to en-de translation by adding prompt_tr to the sentence and pass
the prompt to the model:
model.predict(a_sentence+ prompt_tr)
Output: ['Die Katzen sind spass!']

Working with text-to-text models

Wow! It worked out well. In both cases, the model understood what to do. The model’s translation
capacity is very good even though we use few instances since the pre-trained T5 checkpoints have been
trained on such translation tasks before. We used transfer learning here by fine-tuning! However, let
us remind you that we need to take some action to increase the performance of the model:
• First of all, use the entire dataset, not just 1,000 pieces.
• Increase task diversity. Tasks such as NER, question-answering, and summarization can be added.
• Use more than one dataset for each task.
• Increase instruction diversity. Use the same dataset with a different prompt.
• We used T5-small as the initial model. Choose larger models such as T5-base or T5-large as
suitable for your hardware.
• Model training can take a lot of time. Focus on parameter-efficient approaches and frameworks.
In this part, we have built a simple multi-task learning model by combining all NLP problems into a
single format. Now, let’s discuss what T0 is.

Zero-Shot Text Generalization with T0
The T5 framework was successful in the tasks for which it was trained. This success can be attributed to
its multi-tasking modeling scheme. In other words, solving different tasks within the same architecture
has a positive effect on each task by circulating knowledge between them. However, the T5 framework
has a shortcoming in that it is not task-agnostic, which means it is not designed for solutions that
were not included in its training.
It is known that scaling the model’s parameters, dataset size, and task diversity can lead to breakthroughs
in the language understanding capabilities of the models for a variety of difficult tasks, as well as heldout tasks. With this motivation, the T0 team worked on a task-agnostic model that could successfully
solve zero-shot generalization. This model, called T0, was trained based on the T5 architecture, which
considers scaling the model and the diversity of the data.
Here, you can see a simplified T0 diagram of training and inference:

111

112

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Figure 4.4 – The T0 framework

As shown in the figure, the model is first trained on a diverse mixture of held-in tasks (at the top of
the figure). Then, it is evaluated on zero-shot generalization to the held-out tasks that were not seen
during training (at the bottom of the figure). There are 62 datasets grouped into 12 tasks, and the T0
model is tested for the zero-shot task generalization problem between tasks, not datasets.

Another Denoising-Based Seq2Seq Model – BART
As with XLNet, the BART model (see the paper BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for
Natural Language Generation, Translation, and Comprehension, 2019) takes advantage of the schemes
of AE and AR models. It uses standard Seq2Seq transformer architecture, with a small modification.
However, it has a different training objective than other AR models. It uses a variety of noising
approaches that corrupt documents rather than predicting the next word. The main contribution
of the model to the field is that it allows us to apply several types of creative corruption schemes, as
shown in the following diagram:

Working with text-to-text models

Figure 4.5 – Diagram from the original BART paper

We will look at each scheme in detail, as follows:
• Token masking: Tokens are randomly masked with a [MASK] symbol, the same as with the
BERT model.
• Token deletion: Tokens are randomly removed from the documents. The model is forced to
determine which positions are removed.
• Text infilling: Following SpanBERT, a number of text spans are sampled, and then they are
replaced by a single [MASK] token. There is also [MASK] token insertion.
• Sentence permutation: The sentences in the input are segmented and shuffled in a random order.
• Document rotation: The document is rotated so that it begins with a randomly selected token,
C in the preceding diagram. The objective is to find the start position of a document.
The BART model can be fine-tuned in several ways for downstream applications such as BERT.
For the task of sequence classification, the input is passed through an encoder and a decoder, and
the final hidden state of the decoder is considered the learned representation. Then, a simple linear
classifier can make predictions. Likewise, for token classification tasks, the entire document is fed into
the encoder and decoder, and the last state of the final decoder is the representation for each token.
Based on these representations, we can carry out token classification tasks such as NER and POS tagging.
For sequence generation, the decoder block of the BART model can be directly fine-tuned for sequencegeneration tasks such as abstractive QA or summarization. The BART authors trained the models
using two standard summarization datasets: CNN/DailyMail and XSum. The authors also showed
that it is possible to use both the encoder part—which consumes a source language—and the decoder
part, which produces the words in the target language as a single pre-trained decoder for MT. They
replaced the encoder embedding layer with a new randomly initialized encoder in order to learn words
in the source language. Then, the model is trained in an end-to-end fashion, which trains the new
encoder to map foreign words into an input that BART can denoise to the target language. The new
encoder can use a separate vocabulary, including foreign language, from the original BART model.

113

114

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

In the Hugging Face platform, we can access the original pre-trained BART model with the following
line of code:
AutoModel.from_pretrained('facebook/bart-large')

When we call the standard summarization pipeline of the transformers library, as shown
in the following line of code, a distilled pre-trained BART model is loaded. This call implicitly loads
the sshleifer/distilbart-cnn-12-6 model and the corresponding tokenizers, as follows:
summarizer = pipeline("summarization")

The following code explicitly loads the same model and the corresponding tokenizer. The code example
takes a text to be summarized and outputs the results:
from transformers import (
    BartTokenizer, BartForConditionalGeneration, BartConfig)
from transformers import pipeline
model = BartForConditionalGeneration\
    .from_pretrained('sshleifer/distilbart-cnn-12-6')
tokenizer = BartTokenizer\
    .from_pretrained('sshleifer/distilbart-cnn-12-6')
nlp=pipeline("summarization",
     model=model,
     tokenizer=tokenizer)
text='''
We order two different types of jewelry from this
company the other jewelry we order is perfect.
However with this jewelry I have a few things I
don't like. The little Stone comes out of these
and customers are complaining and bringing them
back and we are having to put new jewelry in their
holes. You cannot sterilize these in an autoclave
...[truncated]'''
q=nlp(text)
import pprint
pp = pprint.PrettyPrinter(indent=0, width=100)
pp.pprint(q[0]['summary_text'])
(' The little Stone comes out of these little stones and customers
are complaining and bringing ' 'them back and we are having to put new
jewelry in their holes . You cannot sterilize these in an ' 'autoclave
because it heats up too much and the glue does not hold up so the
second group of ' 'these that we used I did not sterilize them that
way and the stones still came out.')O/

In the next section, we look at how to train base models.

GLM training

GLM training
In this section, you will learn how it is possible to train your own language models. We will start with
GPT-2 and get a deeper look inside its different functions for training using the transformers library.
You can find any corpus to train your own GPT-2, but for this example, we used Emma by Jane Austen,
which is a romantic novel. Training on a much bigger corpus is highly recommended to generate
more general language.
Before we start, it’s good to note that we used TensorFlow’s native training functionality to show that
all Hugging Face models can be directly trained on TensorFlow or PyTorch if you wish to. Follow
these steps:
1.

You can download the Emma raw text by using the following command:
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/teropa/nlp/master/
resources/corpora/gutenberg/austen-emma.txt

2.

The next step is to train the BytePairEncoding tokenizer for GPT-2 on a corpus that you
intend to train your GPT-2 on. The following code will import the BPE tokenizer from the
tokenizers library:
from tokenizers.models import BPE
from tokenizers import Tokenizer
from tokenizers.decoders import ByteLevel as ByteLevelDecoder
from tokenizers.normalizers import Sequence, Lowercase
from tokenizers.pre_tokenizers import ByteLevel
from tokenizers.trainers import BpeTrainer

3.

As you can see, in this example, we intend to train a more advanced tokenizer by adding more
functionality, such as the Lowercase normalization. To make a tokenizer object, you
can use the following code:
tokenizer = Tokenizer(BPE())
tokenizer.normalizer = Sequence([Lowercase()])
tokenizer.pre_tokenizer = ByteLevel()
tokenizer.decoder = ByteLevelDecoder()

The first line makes a tokenizer from the BPE tokenizer class. For the normalization part,
Lowercase has been added, and the pre_tokenizer attribute is set to ByteLevel to ensure
we have bytes as our input. The decoder attribute must be also set to ByteLevelDecoder
to be able to decode correctly.

115

116

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

4.

Next, the tokenizer will be trained using a 50000 maximum vocabulary size and an initial
alphabet from ByteLevel, as follows:
trainer = BpeTrainer(vocab_size=50000,
    inital_alphabet=ByteLevel.alphabet(),
    special_tokens=[
        "<s>",
        "<pad>",
        "</s>",
        "<unk>",
        "<mask>"
        ])
tokenizer.train(["austen-emma.txt"], trainer)

5.

It is also necessary to add special tokens to be considered. To save the tokenizer, you are required
to create a directory, as follows:
!mkdir tokenizer_gpt

6.

You can save the tokenizer by running the following command:
tokenizer.save("tokenizer_gpt/tokenizer.json")

7.

Now that the tokenizer is saved, it’s time to preprocess the corpus and make it ready for GPT-2
training using the saved tokenizer, but first, important imports must not be forgotten. The code
to do the imports is illustrated in the following snippet:
from transformers import (
    GPT2TokenizerFast, GPT2Config, TFGPT2LMHeadModel)

8.

And the tokenizer can be loaded by using GPT2TokenizerFast, as follows:
tokenizer_gpt = GPT2TokenizerFast.from_pretrained(
"tokenizer_gpt")

9.

It is also essential to add special tokens with their marks, like this:
tokenizer_gpt.add_special_tokens({
    "eos_token": "</s>",
    "bos_token": "<s>",
    "unk_token": "<unk>",
    "pad_token": "<pad>",
    "mask_token": "<mask>"
})

GLM training

10. You can also double-check to see if everything is correct or not by running the following code:
tokenizer_gpt.eos_token_id
>> 2

This code will output the End-of-Sentence (EOS) token Identifier (ID), which is 2 for the
current tokenizer.
11. You can also test it for a sentence by executing the following code:
tokenizer_gpt.encode("<s> this is </s>")
>> [0, 265, 157, 56, 2]

For this output, 0 is the beginning of the sentence, 265, 157, and 56 are related to the sentence
itself, and the EOS is marked as 2, which is </s>.
12. These settings must be used when creating a configuration object. The following code will
create a config object and the TensorFlow version of the GPT-2 model:
config = GPT2Config(
    vocab_size=tokenizer_gpt.vocab_size,
    bos_token_id=tokenizer_gpt.bos_token_id,
    eos_token_id=tokenizer_gpt.eos_token_id
)
model = TFGPT2LMHeadModel(config)

13. On running the config object, you can see the configuration in dictionary format, as follows:
config
>> GPT2Config { "activation_function": "gelu_new", "attn_
pdrop": 0.1, "bos_token_id": 0, "embd_pdrop": 0.1, "eos_token_
id": 2, "gradient_checkpointing": false, "initializer_range":
0.02, "layer_norm_epsilon": 1e-05, "model_type": "gpt2",
"n_ctx": 1024, "n_embd": 768, "n_head": 12, "n_inner": null,
"n_layer": 12, "n_positions": 1024, "resid_pdrop": 0.1,
"summary_activation": null, "summary_first_dropout": 0.1,
"summary_proj_to_labels": true, "summary_type": "cls_index",
"summary_use_proj": true, "transformers_version": "4.3.2", "use_
cache": true, "vocab_size": 11750}

As you can see, other settings are not touched, and the interesting part is that vocab_size is
set to 11750. The reason for this is that we set the maximum vocabulary size to be 50000, but
the corpus had fewer words, and its Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) token created 11750 words.
14. Now, you can get your corpus ready for pre-training, as follows:
with open("austen-emma.txt", "r", encoding='utf-8') as f:
    content = f.readlines()

117

118

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

15. The content will now include all raw text from the raw file, but it is required to remove '\n'
from each line and drop lines with fewer than 10 characters, as follows:
content_p = []
for c in content:
    if len(c)>10:
        content_p.append(c.strip())
content_p = " ".join(content_p)+tokenizer_gpt.eos_token

16. Dropping short lines will ensure that the model is trained on long sequences in order to be
able to generate longer sequences. At the end of the preceding snippet, content_p has the
concatenated raw file with eos_token added to the end. But you can follow different strategies
too—for example, you can separate each line by adding </s> to each line, which will help the
model to recognize when the sentence ends. However, we intend to make it work for much
longer sequences without encountering EOS. The code is illustrated in the following snippet:
tokenized_content = tokenizer_gpt.encode(content_p)

The GPT tokenizer from the preceding code snippet will tokenize the whole text and make it
one whole, long sequence of token IDs.
17. Now, it’s time to make the samples for training, as follows:
sample_len = 100
examples = []
for i in range(0, len(tokenized_content)):
    examples.append(
        tokenized_content[i:i + sample_len])

18. The preceding code makes examples a size of 100 for each one starting from a given part
of text and ending at 100 tokens later:
train_data = []
labels = []
for example in examples:
    train_data.append(example[:-1])
    labels.append(example[1:])

In train_data, there will be a sequence of size 99 from the start to the 99th token, and the
labels will have a token sequence from 1 to 100.

GLM training

19. For faster training, it is required to put the data in the form of a TensorFlow dataset, as follows:
Import tensorflow as tf
buffer = 500
batch_size = 16
dataset = tf.data.Dataset.from_tensor_slices(
    (train_data, labels))
dataset = dataset.shuffle(buffer).batch(batch_size,
    drop_remainder=True)

buffer is the buffer size used for shuffling data, and batch_size is the batch size for
training. drop_remainder is used to drop the remainder if it is less than 16.
20. Now, you can specify your optimizer, loss, and metrics properties, as follows:
optimizer = tf.keras.optimizers.Adam(
       learning_rate=3e-5,
       epsilon=1e-08, clipnorm=1.0)
loss = tf.keras.losses\
     .SparseCategoricalCrossentropy(from_logits=True)
metric = tf.keras.metrics\
      .SparseCategoricalAccuracy('accuracy')
model.compile(optimizer=optimizer,
       loss=[loss, *[None] * model.config.n_layer],
       metrics=[metric])

21. The model is compiled and ready to be trained with the number of epochs you wish, as follows:
epochs = 10
model.fit(dataset, epochs=epochs)

You will see an output that looks something like this:

Figure 4.6 – GPT-2 training using TensorFlow/Keras

We will now look at NLG using AR models. Now that you have saved the model, it will be used for
generating sentences in the next section.
Up until this point, you have learned how it is possible to train your own model for NLG. In the next
section, we describe how to utilize NLG models for language generation.

119

120

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

NLG using AR models
In the previous section, you learned how it is possible to train an AR model on your own corpus. As
a result, you trained a GPT-2 version of your own. But the answer to the question How can I use it?
remains. To answer that, let’s proceed as follows:
1.

Let’s start generating sentences from the model you have just trained, as follows:
def generate(start, model):
    input_token_ids = tokenizer_gpt.encode(start,
return_tensors='tf')
    output = model.generate(
        input_token_ids,
        max_length = 500,
        num_beams = 5,
        temperature = 0.7,
        no_repeat_ngram_size=2,
        num_return_sequences=1
    )
    return tokenizer_gpt.decode(output[0])

The generate function that is defined in the preceding code snippet takes a start string and
generates sequences following that string. You can change parameters such as max_length
to a smaller sequence size or num_return_sequences to have different generations.
2.

Let’s just try it with an empty string, as follows:
generate(" ", model)

We get the following output:

Figure 4.7 – GPT-2 text-generation example

NLG using AR models

As you can see from the preceding output, a long text is generated, even if the semantics of the
text is not very pleasing, but the syntax is almost correct in many cases.
3.

Now, let’s try different starts, with max_length set to a lower value such as 30, as follows:
generate("weston was very good")
>> 'weston was very good; but it, that he was a great must be a
mile from them, and a miss taylor in the house;'

As you may recall, weston is one of the characters from the novel.
4.

To save the model, you can use the following code to make it reusable for publishing or
different applications:
model.save_pretrained("my_gpt-2/")

5.

To make sure your model is saved correctly, you can try loading it, as follows:
model_reloaded = TFGPT2LMHeadModel.from_pretrained("my_gpt-2/")

Two files are saved—a config file and a model.h5 file, which is for the TensorFlow version.
We can see both of these files in the following screenshot:

Figure 4.8 – Language model save_pretrained output

6.

Hugging Face also has a standard for filenames that must be used—these standard filenames
are available by using the following import:
from transformers import (WEIGHTS_NAME, CONFIG_NAME,
TF2_WEIGHTS_NAME)

However, when using the save_pretrained function, it is not required to put the filenames—
just the directory will suffice.
7.

Hugging Face also has AutoModel and AutoTokenizer classes, as you saw in the
previous sections. You can also use this functionality to save the model, but before doing that
there are still a few configurations that need to be done manually. The first thing is to save
the tokenizer in the right format to be used by AutoTokenizer. You can do this by using
save_pretrained, as follows:
tokenizer_gpt.save_pretrained("tokenizer_gpt_auto/")

This is the output:

121

122

From Generative Models to Large Language Models

Figure 4.9 – Tokenizer save_pretrained output

8.

The file list is shown in the directory you specified, but tokenizer_config must be
manually changed to be usable. First, you should rename it as config.json, and secondly,
you should add a property in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) format, indicating that the
model_type property is gpt2, as follows:
{"model_type":"gpt2",
...
}

9.

Now, everything is ready, and you can simply use these two lines of code to load model
and tokenizer:
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained("my_gpt-2/", from_tf=True)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("tokenizer_gpt_auto")

However, do not forget to set from_tf to True because your model is saved in TensorFlow format.
Well done. You have now learned how you can pre-train and save your own text-generation model
using TensorFlow and transformers. You have also learned how to train your own AR models.

Summary
In this chapter, we have covered various aspects of GLMs (AR and seq2seq), from pre-training to
fine-tuning. We looked at the best features of such models by training GLMs and fine-tuning them
on tasks such as MT and multi-task training. We explored the basics of more complex models such as
T5, GPT3, and T0 and used this kind of model to perform MT. We used different Python libraries to
train T5-based multi-task learning prototyping. We trained GPT-2 on our own corpus and generated
text using it. We learned how to save it and use it with AutoModel. We also had a deeper look into
how BPE can be trained and used, using the tokenizers library.
In the next chapter, we will see how to fine-tune models for text classification.

References

References
• Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D. and Sutskever, I. (2019). Language Models
are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8), 9.
• Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O. and Zettlemoyer, L.
(2019). BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language Generation,
Translation, and Comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461.
• Xue, L., Constant, N., Roberts, A., Kale, M., Al-Rfou, R., Siddhant, A. and Raffel, C. (2020). mT5:
A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11934.
• Raffel, C. , Shazeer, N. , Roberts, A. , Lee, K. , Narang, S. , Matena, M. and Liu, P. J. (2019).
Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.10683.
• Yang, Z., Dai, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Salakhutdinov, R. and Le, Q. V. (2019). XLNet: Generalized
Autoregressive Pretraining for Language Understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08237.
• Dai, Z., Yang, Z., Yang, Y., Carbonell, J., Le, Q. V. and Salakhutdinov, R. (2019). Transformer-xl:
Attentive Language Models Beyond a Fixed-Length Context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860.
• Chowdhery A, Narang S, Devlin J, Bosma M, Mishra G, Roberts A, Barham P, Chung HW,
Sutton C, Gehrmann S, Schuh P. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311. 2022 Apr 5.
• Sanh V, Webson A, Raffel C, Bach SH, Sutawika L, Alyafeai Z, Chaffin A, Stiegler A, Scao TL,
Raja A, Dey M. Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.08207. 2021 Oct 15.

123

5
Fine-Tuning Language Models
for Text Classification
In this chapter, we will learn how to configure a pre-trained model for text classification and how
to fine-tune it for any text classification downstream task, such as sentiment analysis, multi-class
classification, or multi-label classification. We will also discuss how to handle sentence-pair and
regression problems by covering an implementation example. We will work with well-known datasets
such as GLUE, as well as our own custom datasets. We will then take advantage of the Trainer class,
which deals with the complexity of processes for training and fine-tuning.
First, we will learn how to fine-tune single-sentence binary sentiment classification with the Trainer
class. Then, we will train for sentiment classification with native PyTorch without the Trainer class.
In multi-class classification and multi-label classification, more than two classes will be taken into
consideration. We will have seven class classification fine-tuning tasks to perform. Later, we will train
a text regression model to predict numerical values with sentence pairs.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Introduction to text classification
• Fine-tuning the BERT model for single-sentence binary classification
• Training a classification model with native PyTorch
• Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class classification with custom datasets
• Fine-tuning BERT for sentence-pair regression
• Multi-label text classification
• Utilizing run_glue.py to fine-tune the models

126

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

Technical requirements
We will be using Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises. You will need Python 3.6+ for this.
Ensure that the following packages are installed:
• sklearn
• transformers 4.0+
• datasets
All the notebooks for the coding exercises in this chapter will be available at the following GitHub
link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-SecondEdition.

Introduction to text classification
Text classification (also known as text categorization) is a way of mapping a document (sentence,
Twitter/X post, book chapter, email content, and so on) to a category out of a predefined list (classes).
In the case of two classes that have positive and negative labels, we use binary classification – more
specifically, sentiment analysis. For more than two classes, we call it multi-class classification, where
the classes are mutually exclusive, or multi-label classification, where the classes are not mutually
exclusive, which means a document can receive more than one label. For instance, the content of a
news article may be related to sports and politics at the same time. Beyond this classification, we may
want to score the documents in a range of [-1,1] or rank them in a range of [1-5]. We can solve
this kind of problem with a regression model, where the type of the output is numeric, not categorical.
Luckily, the transformer architecture allows us to solve these problems efficiently. For sentence-pair
tasks such as document similarity or textual entailment, the input is not a single sentence but, rather,
two sentences, as illustrated in the following diagram. We can score to what degree two sentences are
semantically similar or predict whether they are semantically similar. Another sentence-pair task is
textual entailment, where the problem is defined as multi-class classification. Here, two sequences are
mapped as in the GLUE benchmark to entail/contradict/neutral:

Fine-tuning a BERT model for single-sentence binary classification

Figure 5.1 – Text classification scheme

Let’s start our training process by fine-tuning a pre-trained BERT model. Fine-tuning requires making
minor adjustments to the weights of the existing BERT model to adapt it to a different NLP task. We
will use a very common task for fine-tuning now: sentiment analysis.

Fine-tuning a BERT model for single-sentence binary
classification
In this section, we will discuss how to fine-tune a pre-trained BERT model for sentiment analysis by
using the popular IMDb sentiment dataset. Working with a GPU will speed up our learning process,
but if you do not have such resources, you can work with a CPU as well for fine-tuning. Let’s get started.
To learn about and save our current device, we can execute the following lines of code:
from torch import cuda
device = 'cuda' if cuda.is_available() else 'cpu'

We will use the DistilBertForSequenceClassification class here, which is inherited
from the DistilBert class, with a special sequence classification head at the top. We can utilize
this classification head to train the classification model, where the number of classes is 2 by default:
from transformers import (
    DistilBertTokenizerFast, DistilBertForSequenceClassification)
model_path= 'distilbert-base-uncased'
tokenizer = DistilBertTokenizerFast.from_pre-trained(model_path)
model = DistilBertForSequenceClassification.from_pre-trained(
model_path,
    id2label={0:"NEG", 1:"POS"},
    label2id={"NEG":0, "POS":1})

127

128

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

Notice that two parameters called id2label and label2id are passed to the model to use during
inference. Alternatively, we can instantiate a particular config object and pass it to the model,
as follows:
config = AutoConfig.from_pre-trained(....)
SequenceClassification.from_pre-trained(.... config=config)

Now, let’s select a popular sentiment classification dataset called the IMDb dataset. The original dataset
consists of two sets of data: 25,000 examples for training and 25 examples for testing. We will split
the dataset into test and validation sets. Note that the examples for the first half of the dataset are
positive, while the second half ’s examples are all negative. We can distribute the examples as follows:
from datasets import load_dataset
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb', split="train")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb', split="test[:6250]+test[-6250:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[6250:12500]+test[-12500:-6250]")

Let’s check the shape of the dataset:
imdb_train.shape, imdb_test.shape, imdb_val.shape
((25000, 2), (12500, 2), (12500, 2))

You can take a small portion of the dataset based on your computational resources. For a smaller
portion, you should run the following code to select 4,000 examples for training, 1,000 for testing,
and 1,000 for validation:
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="train[:2000]+train[-2000:]")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[:500]+test[-500:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[500:1000]+test[-1000:-500]")

Now, we can pass these datasets through the tokenizer model to make them ready for training:
enc_train = imdb_train.map(lambda e: tokenizer( e['text'],
    padding=True, truncation=True), batched=True,
    batch_size=1000)
enc_test = imdb_test.map(lambda e: tokenizer( e['text'],
    padding=True, truncation=True), batched=True,
    batch_size=1000)
enc_val = imdb_val.map(lambda e: tokenizer( e['text'],

Fine-tuning a BERT model for single-sentence binary classification

    padding=True, truncation=True), batched=True,
    batch_size=1000)

Let’s see what the training set looks like. The attention mask and input IDs were added to the dataset
by the tokenizer so that the BERT model could process them:
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame(enc_train)

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.2 – Encoded training dataset

At this point, the datasets are ready for training and testing. The Trainer class (TFTrainer for
TensorFlow) and the TrainingArguments class (TFTrainingArguments for TensorFlow)
will help us with much of the training complexity. We will define our argument set within the
TrainingArguments class, which will then be passed to the Trainer object.
Let’s define what each training argument does:

129

130

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

Table 5.1 – Table of different training argument definitions

For more information, please check the API documentation of TrainingArguments or execute
the following code in a Python notebook:
TrainingArguments?

Although deep learning architectures such as LSTM need many epochs (sometimes more than 50),
for transformer-based fine-tuning, we will typically be satisfied with an epoch number of 3 due to
transfer learning. Most of the time, this number is enough for fine-tuning, as a pre-trained model
learns a lot about the language during the pre-training phase, which takes about 50 epochs on average.
To determine the correct number of epochs, we need to monitor training and evaluation loss. We will
learn how to track training in Chapter 11.
This will be enough for many downstream task problems, as we will see here. During the training
process, our model checkpoints will be saved under the ./MyIMDBModel folder every 200 steps:
from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='./MyIMDBModel',
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,

Fine-tuning a BERT model for single-sentence binary classification

    num_train_epochs=3,
    per_device_train_batch_size=32,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=64,
    warmup_steps=100,
    weight_decay=0.01,
    logging_strategy='steps',
    logging_dir='./logs',
    logging_steps=200,
    evaluation_strategy= 'steps',
    fp16= cuda.is_available(),
    load_best_model_at_end=True
)

Before instantiating a Trainer object, we will define the compute_metrics() method, which
helps us monitor the progress of the training in terms of particular metrics for whatever we need,
such as precision, RMSE, Pearson correlation, BLEU, and so on. Text classification problems (such as
sentiment classification and multi-class classification) are mostly evaluated with micro-averaging or
macro-averaging F1 scores. While the macro-averaging method gives equal weight to each class, microaveraging gives equal weight to each per-text or per-token classification decision. Micro-averaging is
equal to the ratio of the number of times the model decides correctly to the total number of decisions
that have been made. On the other hand, the macro-averaging method computes the average score
of precision, recall, and F1 for each class. For our classification problem, macro-averaging is more
convenient for evaluation since we want to give equal weight to each label, as follows:
from sklearn.metrics import (
    accuracy_score, Precision_Recall_fscore_support)
def compute_metrics(pred):
    labels = pred.label_ids
    preds = pred.predictions.argmax(-1)
    Precision, Recall, f1, _ = \
        Precision_Recall_fscore_support(labels,
            preds, average='macro')
    acc = accuracy_score(labels, preds)
    return {
        'Accuracy': acc,
        'F1': f1,
        'Precision': Precision,
        'Recall': Recall
    }

131

132

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

We are almost ready to start the training process. Now, let’s instantiate the Trainer object and
start it. The Trainer class is a very powerful and optimized tool for organizing complex training
and evaluation processes for PyTorch and TensorFlow (TFTrainer for TensorFlow) thanks to the
transformers library:
trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=enc_train,
    eval_dataset=enc_val,
    compute_metrics= compute_metrics
)

Finally, we can start the training process:
results=trainer.train()

The preceding call starts logging metrics, which we will discuss in more detail in Chapter 11. The entire
IMDb dataset includes 25,000 training examples. With a batch size of 32, we have 25K/32 ~=782 steps,
and 2,346 (782 x 3) steps to go for 3 epochs, as shown in the following progress bar:

Figure 5.3 – The output produced by the Trainer object

The Trainer object keeps the checkpoint whose validation loss is the smallest at the end. It selects
the checkpoint at step 1,400 since the validation loss at this step is the minimum. Let’s evaluate the
best checkpoint on three (train/test/validation) datasets:
q=[trainer.evaluate(eval_dataset=data) for data in\
    [enc_train, enc_val, enc_test]]
pd.DataFrame(q, index=["train","val","test"]).iloc[:,:5]

Fine-tuning a BERT model for single-sentence binary classification

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.4 – Classification model’s performance on the train/validation/test datasets

Well done! We have successfully completed the training/testing phase and received 92.6 accuracy
and 92.6 F1 for our macro-average. To monitor your training process in more detail, you can call
advanced tools such as TensorBoard. These tools parse the logs and enable us to track various metrics
for comprehensive analysis. We’ve already logged the performance and other metrics under the ./
logs folder. Just running the tensorboard function within our Python notebook will be enough,
as shown in the following code block (we will discuss TensorBoard and other monitoring tools in
detail in Chapter 11:
%reload_ext tensorboard
%tensorboard --logdir logs

Now, we will use the model for inference to check whether it works properly. Let’s define a prediction
function to simplify the prediction steps, as follows:
def get_prediction(text):
    inputs = tokenizer(text, padding=True,truncation=True,
        max_length=250, return_tensors="pt").to(device)
    outputs = model(inputs["input_ids"].to(device),
        inputs["attention_mask"].to(device))
    probs = outputs[0].softmax(1)
    return probs, probs.argmax()

Now, run the model for inference:
text = "I didn't like the movie it bored me "
get_prediction(text)[1].item()
0

133

134

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

What we have here is 0, which is a negative. We have already defined which ID refers to which label.
We can use this mapping scheme to get the label. Alternatively, we can simply pass all these boring
steps to a dedicated API, namely Pipeline, which we are already familiar with. Before instantiating it,
let’s save the best model for further inference:
model_save_path = "MyBestIMDBModel"
trainer.save_model(model_save_path)
tokenizer.save_pre-trained(model_save_path)

The Pipeline API is an easy way to use pre-trained models for inference. We load the model from
where we saved it and pass it to the Pipeline API, which does the rest. We can skip this saving step
and, instead, directly pass our model and tokenizer objects in memory to the Pipeline API. If you do
so, you will get the same result.
As shown in the following code, we need to specify the task name argument of pipeline as
sentiment-analysis when we perform binary classification:
from transformers import (
    pipeline, DistilBertForSequenceClassification,
    DistilBertTokenizerFast)
model = DistilBertForSequenceClassification.from_pre-trained("
MyBestIMDBModel")
tokenizer= DistilBertTokenizerFast.from_pre-trained("MyBestIMDBModel")
nlp= pipeline("sentiment-analysis", model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)
nlp("the movie was very impressive")
Out: [{'label': 'POS', 'score': 0.9621992707252502}]
>>> nlp("the text of the picture was very poor")
Out: [{'label': 'NEG', 'score': 0.9938313961029053}]

The Pipeline API knows how to treat the input and somehow learns which ID refers to which label
(POS or NEG). It also yields the class probabilities.
Well done! We have fine-tuned a sentiment prediction model for the IMDb dataset using the Trainer
class. In the next section, we will do the same binary classification training but with native PyTorch.
We will also use a different dataset.

Training a classification model with native PyTorch
The Trainer class is very powerful, and we have the Hugging Face team to thank for providing
such a useful tool. However, in this section, we will fine-tune the pre-trained model from scratch to
see what happens under the hood. Let’s get started.

Training a classification model with native PyTorch

First, let’s load the model for fine-tuning. We will select DistilBert here since it is a small, fast,
and cheap version of BERT:
from transformers import DistilBertForSequenceClassification
model = DistilBertForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pre-trained('distilbert-base-uncased')

To fine-tune any model, we need to put it into training mode, as follows:
model.train()

Now, we must load the tokenizer:
from transformers import DistilBertTokenizerFast
tokenizer = DistilBertTokenizerFast.from_pre-trained(
'bert-base-uncased')

Since the Trainer class organized the entire process for us, we did not deal with optimization
and other training settings in the previous IMDb sentiment classification exercise. Now, we need to
instantiate the optimizer ourselves. Here, we must select AdamW, which is an implementation of the
Adam algorithm but with a weight decay fix. Recently, it has been shown that AdamW produces better
training loss and validation loss than models trained with Adam. Hence, it is a widely used optimizer
within many transformer training processes:
from transformers import AdamW
optimizer = AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=1e-3)

To design the fine-tuning process from scratch, we must understand how to implement a single step
forward and backpropagation. We can pass a single batch through the transformer layer and get the
output, which is called forward propagation. Then, we must compute the loss using the output and
ground truth label and update the model weight based on the loss. This is called backpropagation.
The following code receives three sentences associated with the labels in a single batch and performs
forward propagation. At the end, the model automatically computes the loss:
import torch
texts= ["this is a good example",
    "this is a bad example","this is a good one"]
labels= [1,0,1]
labels = torch.tensor(labels).unsqueeze(0)
encoding = tokenizer(texts,
    return_tensors='pt', padding=True,
    truncation=True, max_length=512)
input_ids = encoding['input_ids']
attention_mask = encoding['attention_mask']
outputs = model(input_ids,

135

136

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

    attention_mask=attention_mask, labels=labels)
loss = outputs.loss
loss.backward()
optimizer.step()
Outputs:
SequenceClassifierOutput(
[('loss', tensor(0.7178, grad_fn=<NllLossBackward>)),
('logits',tensor([[ 0.0664, -0.0161],[ 0.0738, 0.0665], [ 0.0690,
-0.0010]], grad_fn=<AddmmBackward>))])

The model takes input_ids and attention_mask, which were produced by the tokenizer, and
computes the loss using ground truth labels. As we can see, the output consists of both loss and logits.
Now, loss.backward() computes the gradient of the tensor by evaluating the model with the
inputs and labels. optimizer.step() performs a single optimization step and updates the weight
using the gradients that were computed, which is called backpropagation. When we put all these lines
into a loop shortly, we will also add optimizer.zero_grad(), which clears the gradient of all
the parameters. It is important to call this at the beginning of the loop; otherwise, we may accumulate
the gradients from multiple steps. The second tensor of the output is logits. In the context of deep
learning, the term logits (short for logistic units) is the last layer of the neural architecture and consists
of prediction values as real numbers. Logits need to be turned into probabilities by the softmax
function in the case of classification. Otherwise, they are simply normalized for regression.
If we want to manually calculate the loss, we must not pass the labels to the model. Due to this, the
model only yields the logits and does not calculate the loss. In the following example, we are computing
the cross-entropy loss manually:
from torch.nn import functional
labels = torch.tensor([1,0,1])
outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask=attention_mask)
loss = functional.cross_entropy(outputs.logits, labels)
loss.backward()
optimizer.step()
loss
Output: tensor(0.6101, grad_fn=<NllLossBackward>)

With that, we’ve learned how batch input is fed in the forward direction through the network in a
single step. Now, it is time to design a loop that iterates over the entire dataset in batches to train the
model with several epochs. To do so, we will start by designing the Dataset class. It is a subclass of
torch.Dataset, inherits member variables and functions, and implements the __init__()
and __getitem()__ abstract functions:
from torch.utils.data import Dataset
class MyDataset(Dataset):
    def __init__(self, encodings, labels):
        self.encodings = encodings

Training a classification model with native PyTorch

        self.labels = labels
    def __getitem__(self, idx):
        item = {key: torch.tensor(val[idx]) for key, \
            val in self.encodings.items()}
        item['labels'] = torch.tensor(self.labels[idx])
        return item
    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.labels)

Let’s fine-tune the model for sentiment analysis by taking another sentiment analysis dataset called
the Stanford Sentiment Treebank v2 (sst2) dataset. We will also load the corresponding metric
for sst2 for evaluation, as follows:
import datasets
from datasets import load_dataset
sst2= load_dataset("glue","sst2")
from datasets import load_metric
metric = load_metric("glue", "sst2")

We will extract the sentences and the labels accordingly:
texts=sst2['train']['sentence']
labels=sst2['train']['label']
val_texts=sst2['validation']['sentence']
val_labels=sst2['validation']['label']

Now, we can pass the datasets through the tokenizer and instantiate the MyDataset object to make
the BERT models work with them:
train_dataset= MyDataset(tokenizer(texts, truncation=True,
    padding=True), labels)
val_dataset=  MyDataset(tokenizer(val_texts,
    truncation=True, padding=True), val_labels)

Let’s instantiate a DataLoader class that provides an interface to iterate through the data samples
by loading order. This also helps with batching and memory pinning:
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=16, shuffle=True)
val_loader = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=16, shuffle=True)

137

138

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

The following lines detect the device and define the AdamW optimizer properly:
from transformers import AdamW
device = torch.device('cuda') \
    if torch.cuda.is_available() else torch.device('cpu')
model.to(device)
optimizer = AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=1e-3)

So far, we know how to implement forward propagation, which is where we process a batch of examples.
Here, batch data is fed in the forward direction through the neural network. In a single step, each
layer from the first to the final one is processed by the batch data, as per the activation function, and
is passed to the successive layer. To go through the entire dataset in several epochs, we designed two
nested loops: the outer loop is for the epoch, while the inner loop is for the steps for each batch. The
inner part is made up of two blocks; one is for training, while the other one is for evaluating each
epoch. As you may have noticed, we called model.train() at the first training loop, and when
we moved the second evaluation block, we called model.eval(). This is important as we put the
model into training and inference mode.
We have already discussed the inner block. Note that we track the model’s performance by means of
the corresponding metric object:
for epoch in range(3):
    model.train()
    for batch in train_loader:
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        input_ids = batch['input_ids'].to(device)
        attention_mask = batch['attention_mask'].to(device)
        labels = batch['labels'].to(device)
        outputs = model(input_ids,
            attention_mask=attention_mask, labels=labels)
        loss = outputs[0]
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
    model.eval()
    for batch in val_loader:
        input_ids = batch['input_ids'].to(device)
        attention_mask = batch['attention_mask'].to(device)
        labels = batch['labels'].to(device)
        outputs = model(input_ids,
            attention_mask=attention_mask, labels=labels)
        predictions=outputs.logits.argmax(dim=-1)
        metric.add_batch(
            predictions=predictions,
            references=batch["labels"],

Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class classification with custom datasets

            )
    eval_metric = metric.compute()
    print(f"epoch {epoch}: {eval_metric}")
OUTPUT:
epoch 0: {'accuracy': 0.9048165137614679}
epoch 1: {'accuracy': 0.8944954128440367}
epoch 2: {'accuracy': 0.9094036697247706}

Well done! We’ve fine-tuned our model and got around 90.94 accuracy. The remaining processes, such
as saving, loading, and inference, will be similar to what we did with the Trainer class.
With that, we are done with binary classification. In the next section, we will learn how to implement
a model for multi-class classification for a language other than English.

Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class classification with
custom datasets
In this section, we will fine-tune the Turkish BERT, namely BERTurk, to perform seven-class classification
downstream tasks with a custom dataset. This dataset has been compiled from Turkish newspapers
and consists of seven categories. We will start by getting the dataset. Alternatively, you can find it in
this book’s GitHub repository or get it from https://www.kaggle.com/savasy/ttc4900.
First, run the following code to get data within a Python notebook:
!wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/savasy/
TurkishTextClassification/master/TTC4900.csv

Then, we load the data:
import pandas as pd
data= pd.read_csv("TTC4900.csv")
data=data.sample(frac=1.0, random_state=42)

Let’s organize the IDs and labels with id2label and label2id to make the model figure out
which ID refers to which label. We will also pass the number of labels, NUM_LABELS, to the model
to specify the size of a thin classification head layer on top of the BERT model:
labels=["teknoloji","ekonomi","saglik",
    "siyaset","kultur","spor","dunya"]
NUM_LABELS= len(labels)
id2label={i:l for i,l in enumerate(labels)}
label2id={l:i for i,l in enumerate(labels)}
data["labels"]=data.category.map(lambda x: label2id[x.strip()])
data.head()

139

140

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.5 – Text classification dataset – TTC 4900

Let’s count and plot the number of classes using a pandas object:
data.category.value_counts().plot(kind='pie')

As shown in the following diagram, the dataset classes have been fairly distributed:

Figure 5.6 – The class distribution

Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class classification with custom datasets

The following execution instantiates a sequence classification model with the number of labels (7),
label ID mappings, and BERTurk:
>>> model

The output will be a summary of the model and is too long to show here. Instead, let’s turn our
attention to the last layer:
(classifier): Linear(in_features=768, out_features=7, bias=True)

You may have noticed that we did not choose DistilBert as there is no pre-trained uncased
DistilBert for the Turkish language:
from transformers import BertTokenizerFast
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast\
    .from_pre-trained("dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-uncased",
        max_length=512)
from transformers import BertForSequenceClassification
model = BertForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pre-trained("dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-uncased",
        num_labels=NUM_LABELS,
        id2label=id2label, label2id=label2id)
model.to(device)

Now, let’s prepare the training (50%), validation (25%), and test (25%) datasets, as follows:
SIZE= data.shape[0]
## sentences
train_texts= list(data.text[:SIZE//2])
val_texts= list(data.text[SIZE//2:(3*SIZE)//4 ])
test_texts= list(data.text[(3*SIZE)//4:])
## labels
train_labels= list(data.labels[:SIZE//2])
val_labels= list(data.labels[SIZE//2:(3*SIZE)//4])
test_labels= list(data.labels[(3*SIZE)//4:])
## check the size
len(train_texts), len(val_texts), len(test_texts)
(2450, 1225, 1225)

The following code tokenizes the sentences of three datasets and their tokens and converts them into
integers (input_ids), which are then fed into the BERT model:
train_encodings = tokenizer(train_texts, truncation=True,
padding=True)
val_encodings = tokenizer(val_texts, truncation=True, padding=True)
test_encodings = tokenizer(test_texts, truncation=True, padding=True)

141

142

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

We have already implemented the MyDataset class. The class inherits from the abstract Dataset
class by overwriting the __getitem__ and __len__() methods, which are expected to return
the items and the size of the dataset using any data loader, respectively:
train_dataset = MyDataset(train_encodings, train_labels)
val_dataset = MyDataset(val_encodings, val_labels)
test_dataset = MyDataset(test_encodings, test_labels)

We will keep the batch size at 16 since we have a relatively small dataset. Notice that the other
parameters of TrainingArguments are almost the same as they were for the previous sentiment
analysis experiment:
from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='./TTC4900Model',
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=32,
    warmup_steps=100,
    weight_decay=0.01,
    logging_strategy='steps',
    logging_dir='./multi-class-logs',
    logging_steps=50,
    evaluation_strategy="epoch",
    eval_steps=50,
    save_strategy="epoch",
    fp16=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True)

Sentiment analysis and text classification are objects of the same evaluation metrics – that is, macroaveraged F1, precision, and recall. Therefore, we will not define the compute_metric() function
again. Here is the code for instantiating a Trainer object:
trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=val_dataset,
    compute_metrics= compute_metrics
)

Fine-tuning BERT for multi-class classification with custom datasets

Finally, let’s start the training process:
trainer.train()

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.7 – The output of the Trainer class for text classification

To check the trained model, we must evaluate the fine-tuned model on three dataset splits, as follows.
Our best model is fine-tuned at step 300 with a loss of 0.28012:
q=[trainer.evaluate(eval_dataset=data) for data \
    in [train_dataset, val_dataset, test_dataset]]
pd.DataFrame(q, index=["train","val","test"]).iloc[:,:5]

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.8 – The text classification model’s performance on the train/validation/test dataset

The classification accuracy is around 92.6, while the F1 macro-average is around 92.5. In the literature,
many approaches have been tested on this Turkish benchmark dataset. They mostly followed TF-IDF
and linear classifier, word2vec embeddings, or an LSTM-based classifier, and got around 90.0 F1 at
best. Compared to those approaches, other than the transformer model, the fine-tuned BERT model
outperforms them.

143

144

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

As with any other experiment, we can track the experiment via TensorBoard:
%load_ext tensorboard
%tensorboard --logdir multi-class-logs/

Let’s design a function that will run the model for inference. If you want to see a real label instead of
an ID, you can use the config object of our model, as shown in the following predict function:
def predict(text):
    inputs = tokenizer(text, padding=True, truncation=True,
        max_length=512, return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
    outputs = model(**inputs)
    probs = outputs[0].softmax(1)
    return (probs,
        probs.argmax(),
        model.config.id2label[probs.argmax().item()])

Now, we are ready to call the predict function for text classification inference. The following code
classifies a sentence about a football team:
text = "Fenerbahçeli futbolcular kısa paslarla hazırlık çalışması
yaptılar"
predict(text)
Output:
(tensor([[5.6183e-04, 4.9046e-04, 5.1385e-04,
    9.94e-04, 3.44e-04, 9.96e-01, 4.061e-04]],
    device='cuda:0',
    grad_fn=<SoftmaxBackward>),
tensor(5, device='cuda:0'),
'spor')

As we can see, the model correctly predicted the sentence as sports (spor). Now, it is time to save the
model and reload it using the from_pre-trained() function. Here is the code:
model_path = "turkish-text-classification-model"
trainer.save_model(model_path)
tokenizer.save_pre-trained(model_path)

Now, we can reload the saved model and run inference with the help of the pipeline class:
model_path = "turkish-text-classification-model"
from transformers import (pipeline,
    BertForSequenceClassification,
    BertTokenizerFast)

Fine-tuning the BERT model for sentence-pair regression

model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pre-trained(model_path)
tokenizer= BertTokenizerFast.from_pre-trained(model_path)
nlp= pipeline("sentiment-analysis",
                 model=model, tokenizer=tokenizer)

You may have noticed that the task’s name is sentiment-analysis. This term may be confusing
but this argument will actually return TextClassificationPipeline at the end. Let’s run
the pipeline:
nlp("Sinemada hangi filmler oynuyor bugün")
[{'label': 'kultur', 'score': 0.9930670261383057}]
nlp("Dolar ve Euro bugün yurtiçi piyasalarda yükseldi")
[{'label': 'ekonomi', 'score': 0.9927696585655212}]
nlp("Bayern Münih ile Barcelona bugün karşı karşıya geliyor. \
    Maçı İngiliz hakem James Watts yönetecek!")
[{'label': 'spor', 'score': 0.9975664019584656}]

The model has predicted successfully.
So far, we have implemented two single-sentence tasks – that is, sentiment analysis and multi-class
classification. In the next section, we will learn how to handle sentence-pair input and how to design
a regression model with BERT.

Fine-tuning the BERT model for sentence-pair regression
The regression model is typically used for classification purposes but, in this case, the last layer
consists of only one unit. Instead of being processed by softmax logistic regression, it is normalized.
To define the model and incorporate a single-unit head layer at the top, there are two options: directly
include the num_labels=1 parameter in the BERT.from_pre-trained() method or pass
this information through a config object. Initially, this needs to be copied from the config object
of the pre-trained model, as follows:
from transformers import (
    DistilBertConfig, DistilBertTokenizerFast,
    DistilBertForSequenceClassification)
model_path='distilbert-base-uncased'
config = DistilBertConfig.from_pre-trained(model_path,
num_labels=1)
tokenizer = DistilBertTokenizerFast.from_pre-trained(model_path)
model = DistilBertForSequenceClassification.from_pre-trained(
    model_path, config=config)

145

146

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

Well, our pre-trained model has a single-unit head layer thanks to the num_labels=1 parameter.
Now, we are ready to fine-tune the model with our dataset. Here, we will use the Semantic Textual
Similarity Benchmark (STS-B), which is a collection of sentence pairs that have been drawn from a
variety of content, such as news headlines. Each pair has been annotated with a similarity score from
1 to 5. Our task is to fine-tune the BERT model to predict these scores. We will evaluate the model
using the Pearson/Spearman correlation coefficients while following the literature. Let’s get started.
The following code loads the data. The original data was split into three. However, the test split has
no label so we can divide the validation data into two parts, as follows:
import datasets
from datasets import load_dataset
stsb_train= load_dataset('glue','stsb', split="train")
stsb_validation = load_dataset('glue','stsb', split="validation")
stsb_validation=stsb_validation.shuffle(seed=42)
stsb_val= datasets.Dataset.from_dict(stsb_validation[:750])
stsb_test=datasets.Dataset.from_dict(stsb_validation[750:])

Let’s make the stsb_train training data neat by wrapping it with pandas:
pd.DataFrame(stsb_train)

Here is what the training data looks like:

Figure 5.9 – STS-B training dataset

Run the following code to check the shape of the three sets:
stsb_train.shape, stsb_val.shape, stsb_test.shape
((5749, 4), (750, 4), (750, 4))

Fine-tuning the BERT model for sentence-pair regression

Run the following code to tokenize the datasets:
enc_train = stsb_train.map(lambda e: tokenizer(
        e['sentence1'],e['sentence2'], padding=True,
        truncation=True),
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_val = stsb_val.map(lambda e: tokenizer( e['sentence1'],
        e['sentence2'], padding=True, truncation=True),
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_test = stsb_test.map(lambda e: tokenizer(
        e['sentence1'],e['sentence2'], padding=True,
        truncation=True),
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)

The tokenizer merges two sentences with the [SEP] delimiter and produces single input_ids and
attention_mask for a sentence pair, as shown here:
pd.DataFrame(enc_train)

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.10 – Encoded training dataset

Similar to other experiments, we follow almost the same scheme for the TrainingArguments
and Trainer classes. Here is the code:
from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='./stsb-model',
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,

147

148

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

    num_train_epochs=3,
    per_device_train_batch_size=32,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=64,
    warmup_steps=100,
    weight_decay=0.01,
    logging_strategy='steps',
    logging_dir='./logs',
    logging_steps=50,
    evaluation_strategy="steps",
    save_strategy="epoch",
    fp16=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True
)

Another important difference between the current regression task and the previous classification
tasks is the design of compute_metrics. Here, our evaluation metric will be based on the Pearson
correlation coefficient and Spearman’s rank correlation following the common practice provided in the
literature. We also provide the Mean Squared Error (MSE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) metrics, which are commonly used, especially for regression models:
import numpy as np
from scipy.stats import pearsonr
from scipy.stats import spearmanr
def compute_metrics(pred):
    preds = np.squeeze(pred.predictions)
    return {"MSE": ((preds - pred.label_ids) ** 2)\
        .mean().item(),
        "RMSE": (np.sqrt (((preds - pred.label_ids)**2)\
        .mean())).item(),
        "MAE": (np.abs(preds-pred.label_ids))\
        .mean().item(),
        "Pearson" : pearsonr(preds,pred.label_ids)[0],
        "Spearman":spearmanr(preds,pred.label_ids)[0]
        }

Now, let’s instantiate the Trainer object:
trainer = Trainer(
        model=model,
        args=training_args,
        train_dataset=enc_train,
        eval_dataset=enc_val,
        compute_metrics=compute_metrics,
        tokenizer=tokenizer)

Fine-tuning the BERT model for sentence-pair regression

Run the training, like so:
train_result = trainer.train()

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.11 – Training result for text regression

The best validation loss that’s computed is 0.544973 at step 450. Let’s evaluate the best checkpoint
model at that step, as follows:
q=[trainer.evaluate(eval_dataset=data) for data in \
    [enc_train, enc_val, enc_test]]
pd.DataFrame(q, index=["train","val","test"]).iloc[:,:5]

The output is as follows:

Figure 5.12 – Regression performance on the training/validation/test dataset

The Pearson and Spearman correlation scores are around 87.54 and 87.28 on the test dataset, respectively.
We did not get a state-of-the-art result, but we did get a comparable result for the STS-B task based
on the GLUE benchmark leaderboard.
We are now ready to run the model for inference. Let’s take the following two sentences, which share
the same meaning, and pass them to the model:
s1,s2="A plane is taking off.","An air plane is taking off."
encoding = tokenizer(s1,s2, return_tensors='pt',

149

150

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

    padding=True, truncation=True, max_length=512)
input_ids = encoding['input_ids'].to(device)
attention_mask = encoding['attention_mask'].to(device)
outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask=attention_mask)
outputs.logits.item()
OUTPUT: 4.033723831176758

The following code consumes the negative sentence pair, which means the sentences are
semantically different:
s1,s2="The men are playing soccer.","A man is riding a motorcycle."
encoding = tokenizer("hey how are you there",
    "hey how are you", return_tensors='pt', padding=True,
    truncation=True, max_length=512)
input_ids = encoding['input_ids'].to(device)
attention_mask = encoding['attention_mask'].to(device)
outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask=attention_mask)
outputs.logits.item()
OUTPUT: 2.3579328060150146

Finally, we will save the model, as follows:
model_path = "sentence-pair-regression-model"
trainer.save_model(model_path)
tokenizer.save_pre-trained(model_path)

Well done! We can congratulate ourselves since we have successfully completed three tasks: sentiment
analysis, multi-class classification, and sentence pair regression. All the tasks are based on a single
label. Next, we will learn how to solve a multilabel classification problem.

Multilabel text classification
We had already solved multi-class text classification in this chapter, where a single label is assigned to
each text. Now, we will discuss multi-label classification, where a text can have multiple labels. This is
common in NLP applications such as news classification. For instance, news can be related to sports
and health at the same time. The following figure depicts multi-label classification:

Multilabel text classification

Figure 5.13 – Multi-label classification scheme

Now, we will dive into how to develop a pipeline to apply multi-label classification. To do so, we will
take the PubMed dataset, which comprises around 50,000 research articles. The dataset has multiple
labels for the articles. Biomedical experts manually annotated these articles with MeSH labels, and
each article has been described based on the combination of 14 MeSH labels.
Now, we will start by importing the libraries:
import torch, numpy as np, pandas as pd
from datasets import Dataset
from datasets import load_dataset
from transformers import (AutoTokenizer,
    AutoModelForSequenceClassification,
    TrainingArguments, Trainer)

The dataset is already hosted by the Hugging Face Hub. Let’s download it from the Hub as seen in the
following link. For quick training, we select only 10 % of the training dataset as follows. If you wish,
you can use the entire dataset to get better performance:
path="owaiskha9654/PubMed_MultiLabel_Text_Classification_Dataset_MeSH"
dataset = load_dataset(path, split="train[:10%]")
train_dataset=pd.DataFrame(dataset)
text_column='abstractText' # text field
label_names= list(train_dataset.columns[6:])
num_labels=len(label_names)
print('Number of Labels:' , num_labels)
train_dataset[[text_column]+ label_names]
Output: Number of Labels: 14

As you can see in the following table, we have an abstractText field and 14 possible labels, where
1 and 0 mean the presence and absence of a tag, respectively!

151

152

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

Figure 5.14 – PubMed multi-label dataset

Now, let us compute the label distribution and analyze it with the following code:
train_dataset[label_names].apply(lambda x: sum(x),
    axis=0).plot(kind="bar", figsize=(10,6))

It plots the following:

Figure 5.15 – PubMed dataset label distribution

As seen in the imbalanced distribution, we have some minor labels such as F, H, I, J, L, and Z. When
the entire dataset is analyzed, a similar distribution comes out!

Multilabel text classification

We need to cast the label columns to a single list as follows:
train_dataset["labels"]=train_dataset.apply(
    lambda x: x[label_names].to_numpy(), axis=1)
train_dataset[[text_column, "labels"]]

Now, we have the following shape (abstractText-> labels), which is needed by the
following pipeline:

Figure 5.16 – Processed dataset (text->label)

We will fine-tune distilbert-base-uncased. As we need to tokenize the text, we first load
the Distilbert tokenizer as follows:
model_path="distilbert-base-uncased"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
def tokenize(batch):
    return tokenizer(batch[text_column],
        padding=True,
        truncation=True)

We now split the dataset into three subsets (50% training, 25% validation, and 25% test) and tokenize
them accordingly:
q = train_dataset[[text_column, "labels"]].copy()
CUT= int((q.shape)[0]*0.5)
CUT2= int((q.shape)[0]*0.75)
train_df= q[:CUT] # training set
val_df= q[CUT:CUT2] # validations set
test_df= q[CUT2:]  # test set
train=Dataset.from_pandas(train_df) #Cast to Dataset object
val=Dataset.from_pandas(val_df)
test=Dataset.from_pandas(test_df)
train_encoded = train.map(tokenize, batched=True,

153

154

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

    batch_size=None)
val_encoded = val.map(tokenize, batched=True,
    batch_size=None)
test_encoded = test.map(tokenize, batched=True,
    batch_size=None)

We have three subsets of the dataset that have been encoded by the tokenizer and are ready to be
processed by the Transformer model.
Now, we will define a function that deals with the activations from the last layer (logits) of the
Transformer model to generate a prediction vector. If we were doing single-label classification,
softmax would be the most appropriate formula since we have a single output. However, since many
labels can be correct labels and they are not mutually exclusive, we will pass all labels through the
sigmoid function independently, rather than using softmax. By doing this, we will have the chance
to select either all labels as predictions at the same time or none of them. We make our decision by
passing the output of the sigmoid function through a simple >0.5 threshold.
Now, we will define the compute_metric() function to monitor model performance between the
steps during training. The following function gives the precision, recall, and F1 score of the presence
of the labels by utilizing the sklearn library. Please notice that in the f1_score() function,
we set pos_label=1 since we only focus on the presence of labels. If you take both the presence
and absence of the labels, you can get artificially high results, and it gets hard to monitor the model
performance, especially for label sparsity mode!
Let us define compute metrics function:
from sklearn.metrics import (f1_score,precision_score,\
recall_score)
def compute_metrics(eval_pred):
y_pred, y_true = eval_pred
y_pred = torch.from_numpy(y_pred)
y_true = torch.from_numpy(y_true)
y_pred = y_pred.sigmoid() >0.5
y_true=y_true.bool()
r=recall_score(y_true, y_pred,
average='micro', pos_label=1)
p=precision_score(y_true, y_pred,
average='micro', pos_label=1)
f1=f1_score(y_true, y_pred,
average='micro', pos_label=1)
result={"Recall":r,"Precision":p,"F1":f1}
return result

Multilabel text classification

For single-label multi-class classification, we use softmax activation followed by a cross-entropy
loss function. However, for multi-label mode, we need to use different activation and loss functions.
During implementation, we keep all other functionalities of the original Trainer as is, but we must
adjust the loss function. Specifically, we replace the torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss() function
in the original loss function of the Trainer class with torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss().
As you can see in the following class definition, the torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss()
function computes the loss between the ground truth labels and the raw logits. The loss function first
produces predictions by passing the raw output (logits) to the sigmoid function and computes
the loss accordingly:
class MultilabelTrainer(Trainer):
    def compute_loss(self, model, inputs,
        return_outputs=False):
        labels = inputs.pop("labels")
        outputs = model(**inputs)
        logits = outputs.logits
        loss_fct = torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss()
        preds_=logits.view(-1,self.model.config.num_labels)
        labels_=labels.float().view(-1,
            self.model.config.num_labels)
        loss = loss_fct(preds_,labels_)
        return (loss, outputs) if return_outputs else loss

At this stage, the Trainer instance and the TrainingArguments instance are roughly the same
as in the previous multi-class mode. Here are the arguments:
batch_size=16
num_epoch=3
args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir="/tmp",
    per_device_train_batch_size=batch_size,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=batch_size,
    num_train_epochs=num_epoch,
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True,
    save_steps=100,
    eval_steps=100,
    save_strategy="steps",
    evaluation_strategy="steps")

155

156

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Text Classification

We will load the Distilbert model. Notice that we set the output layer size of the model as 14 (as
in num_labels) units:
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    model_path, num_labels=num_labels)

Well! We are ready to train. Here we go!
multi_trainer = MultilabelTrainer(model, args,
    train_dataset=train_encoded,
    eval_dataset=val_encoded,
    compute_metrics=compute_metrics,
    tokenizer=tokenizer)
multi_trainer.train()

If everything goes well, we can test our model on the test dataset as follows:
res=multi_trainer.predict(test_encoded)
pd.Series(compute_metrics(res[:2])).to_frame()

Here is the output:

Figure 5.17 – Performance on the test dataset

Well! We are done. We trained a multi-label classification model with a sampled dataset for a quick run.
Please note that training the model with the full dataset gets a better F1 score! Please try it yourself!
Next, we will use a script to make the whole process easier.

Utilizing run_glue.py to fine-tune the models
So far, we have designed a fine-tuning architecture from scratch using both native PyTorch and the
Trainer class. The Hugging Face community also provides another powerful script called run_
glue.py for the GLUE benchmark and GLUE-like classification downstream tasks. This script can
handle and organize the entire training/validation process for us. If you want to do quick prototyping,
you should use this script. It can fine-tune any pre-trained models on the Hugging Face Hub. We can
also feed it with our own data in any format.
Please go to the following link to access the script and to learn more: https://github.com/
huggingface/transformers/tree/master/examples.

Summary

The script can perform nine different GLUE tasks. With the script, we can do everything that we have
done with the Trainer class so far. The task name could be one of the following GLUE tasks: cola,
sst2, mrpc, stsb, qqp, mnli, qnli, rte, or wnli.
Here is the script scheme for fine-tuning a model:
export TASK_NAME= "My-Task-Name"
python run_glue.py \
--model_name_or_path bert-base-cased \
--task_name $TASK_NAME \
--do_train \ --do_eval \
--max_seq_length 128 \
--per_device_train_batch_size 32 \
--learning_rate 2e-5 \
--num_train_epochs 3 \
--output_dir /tmp/$TASK_NAME/

The community provides another script called run_glue_no_trainer.py. The main difference
between the original script and this one is that this no_trainer script gives us more chances to
change the options for the optimizer or add any customization that we want to do.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how to fine-tune a pre-trained model for any text classification downstream
task. We fine-tuned the models using sentiment analysis, multi-class classification, and sentence-pair
classification – more specifically, sentence-pair regression and multi-label classification. We worked
with a well-known IMDb dataset and our own custom dataset to train the models. While we took
advantage of the Trainer class to cope with much of the complexity of the processes for training
and fine-tuning, we learned how to train from scratch with native libraries to understand forward
propagation and backpropagation with the transformers library. To summarize, we discussed
and conducted fine-tuning single-sentence classification with Trainer, sentiment classification with
native PyTorch without Trainer, single-sentence multi-class classification, multi-label classification,
and fine-tuning sentence-pair regression.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to fine-tune a pre-trained model for any token classification
downstream task, such as parts-of-speech tagging or named entity recognition.

References
• Maas, Andrew, et al. Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. Proceedings of the 49th annual
meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies. 2011.

157

6
Fine-Tuning Language Models
for Token Classification
In this chapter, we will learn about fine-tuning language models for token classification. Tasks such
as Named Entity Recognition (NER), Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging, and Question Answering
(QA) are explored in this chapter. We will learn how a specific language model can be fine-tuned on
such tasks. We will focus on BERT more than other language models. You will learn how to apply
POS, NER, and QA using BERT. You will get familiar with the theoretical details of these tasks, such
as their respective datasets and how to perform them. After finishing this chapter, you will be able to
perform any token classification task using Transformers.
In this chapter, we will fine-tune BERT for the following tasks: fine-tuning BERT for token classification
problems such as NER, fine-tuning a language model for an NER problem, and thinking of the QA
problem as a start/stop token classification.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Introduction to token classification
• Fine-tuning language models for NER
• Question answering using token classification
• Question answering for many tasks

Technical requirements
We will be using Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises, and Python 3.6+ and the following
packages need to be installed:
• sklearn
• transformers 4.0+

160

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

• Datasets
• seqeval
All notebooks with coding exercises are available at the following GitHub link: https://github.
com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

Introduction to token classification
The task of classifying each token in a token sequence is called token classification. This task requires
the model to classify each token into a class. POS and NER are two of the most well-known tasks in
this criterion. However, QA is also another major Natural Language Processing (NLP) task that fits
in this category. We will discuss the basics of these three tasks in the following sections. It is important
to note that tasks such as NER, POS, and QA can be seen from two perspectives: labeling the existing
context of the text with respective classes or text generation.
The token classification approach gets the text as input and classifies each respective token into a class.
Take the following example:
"I went to Berlin."

From this sentence, and using token classification-based NER, the output must be in the following form:
I = O
Went = O
to = O
Berlin = Location

However, generative models solve the problem differently; they accept the input as text and generate
the result as text. For example, a T5-based NER model (https://huggingface.co/dbmdz/
t5-base-conll03-english) uses the following format:
I went to [ Berlin | location ]

An extra postprocessing step is required to extract the respective entities if required. The same applies
to QA as well. In generative QA, the answer is not always completely taken from context; instead, a
narrow understanding and rephrasing of the model is also added to the response.
Generative QA can be very useful when not only extraction from text is required but additional
knowledge and background wisdom about the problem is also important. However, with generative
QA, we cannot always ensure that the generated answer is correct because the words are different
from the original answer.

Introduction to token classification

In the following subsection, we will particularly focus on token classification-based approaches that
only label the given input text according to the underlying task. For example, QA here only refers to
open-book QA using token classification. The same also applies to NER and POS.

Understanding NER
One of the well-known tasks in the category of token classification is NER – the recognition of each
token as an entity or not and identifying the type of each detected entity. For example, a text can
contain multiple entities at the same time – person names, locations, organizations, and other types
of entities. The following text is a clear example of NER:
George Washington is one the presidents of the United States of
America.

George Washington is a person name while the United States of America is a
location name. A sequence tagging model is expected to tag each word, each containing information
about the tag. BIO tags are universally used for standard NER tasks.
The following table is a list of tags and their descriptions:

Figure 6.1 – Table of BIOS tags and their descriptions

In this table, B indicates the beginning of a tag and I denotes the inside of a tag, while O is the outside
of the entity. This is the reason that this type of annotation is called BIO. For example, the sentence
shown earlier can be annotated using BIO:
[B-PER|George] [I-PER|Washington] [O|is] [O|one] [O|the]
[O|presidents] [O|of] [B-LOC|United] [I-LOC|States] [I-LOC|of]
[I-LOC|America] [O|.]

161

162

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

Accordingly, the sequence must be tagged in BIO format. A sample dataset such as CoNLL-2003
(https://www.clips.uantwerpen.be/conll2003/ner/) can be in the format shown
as follows:

Figure 6.2 – CoNLL-2003 dataset

In addition to the NER tags we have seen, there are POS tags available for this dataset.

Understanding POS tagging
POS tagging, or grammar tagging, is annotating a word in a given text according to its respective part
of speech. As a simple example, in a given text, identification of each word’s role in the categories of
noun, adjective, adverb, and verb is considered to be POS. However, from a linguistic perspective,
there are many roles other than these four.
In the case of POS tags, there are variations, but the Penn Treebank POS tagset is one of the most
well-known ones. The following screenshot shows a summary and respective descriptions of these roles:

Introduction to token classification

Figure 6.3 – Penn Treebank POS tags

Datasets for POS tasks are annotated like the example shown in Figure 6.2.
The annotation of these tags is very useful in specific NLP applications and is one of the building
blocks of many other methods. Transformers and many advanced models can somehow understand
the relationship between words in their complex architecture.

Understanding QA
A QA or reading comprehension task comprises a set of reading comprehension texts with respective
questions on them. An exemplary dataset from this scope is SQUAD, or the Stanford Question
Answering Dataset. This dataset consists of Wikipedia texts and the respective questions asked about
them. The answers are in the form of segments of the original Wikipedia text.
T﻿﻿he following screenshot shows an example of this dataset:

163

164

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

Figure 6.4 – SQUAD dataset example

The segments highlighted in red are the answers, and important parts of each question are highlighted
in blue. It is required for a good NLP model to segment text according to the question, and this
segmentation can be done in the form of sequence labeling. The model labels the start and end of the
segment as answer start and end segments.
Up to this point, you have learned the basics of modern NLP sequence tagging tasks such as QA, NER,
and POS. In the next section, you will learn how it is possible to fine-tune BERT for these specific
tasks and use the related datasets from the datasets library.

Fine-tuning language models for NER
In this section, we will learn how to fine-tune BERT for an NER task. We will first start with the
datasets library and by loading the CoNLL-2003 dataset.
The dataset card is accessible at https://huggingface.co/datasets/conll2003. The
following screenshot shows this model card from the Hugging Face website:

Fine-tuning language models for NER

Figure 6.5 – CoNLL-2003 dataset card from Hugging Face

From this screenshot, it can be seen that the model is trained on this dataset and is currently available
and listed in the right panel. However, there are also descriptions of the dataset, such as its size and
its characteristics, let’s dive into those now:
1.

To load the dataset, the following commands are used:
import datasets
conll2003 = datasets.load_dataset("conll2003")

A download progress bar will appear, and after finishing downloading and caching, the dataset
will be ready to use. The following screenshot shows the progress bars:

Figure 6.6 – Downloading and preparing the dataset

165

166

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

2.

You can easily double-check the dataset by accessing the training samples using the
following command:
>>> conll2003["train"][0]

The following screenshot shows the result:

Figure 6.7 – CoNLL-2003 train samples from the datasets library

3.

The respective tags for POS and NER are shown in the preceding screenshot. We will use only
NER tags for this example. You can use the following command to get the NER tags available
in this dataset:
>>> conll2003["train"].features["ner_tags"]

4.

The result is also shown in Figure 6.7. All the BIO tags are shown and there are nine tags in total:
>>> Sequence(feature=ClassLabel(num_classes=9, names=['O',
'B-PER', 'I-PER', 'B-ORG', 'I-ORG', 'B-LOC', 'I-LOC', 'B-MISC',
'I-MISC'], names_file=None, id=None), length=-1, id=None)

5.

The next step is to load the BERT tokenizer:
from transformers import BertTokenizerFast
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained("bert-baseuncased")

6.

The tokenizer class can also work with whitespace-tokenized sentences. We need to enable
our tokenizer to work with whitespace-tokenized sentences, because the NER task has a tokenbased label for each token. Tokens in this task are usually whitespace-tokenized words rather
than Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) or any other tokenizer tokens. Let’s see how tokenizer can
be used with a whitespace-tokenized sentence:
tokenizer(["Oh","this","sentence","is","tokenized", "and",
    "splitted","by","spaces"], is_split_into_words=True)

As you can see, by just setting is_split_into_words to True, the problem is solved.

Fine-tuning language models for NER

7.

Preprocessing the data before using it for training is required. To do so, we must use the following
function and map into the entire dataset:
def tokenize_and_align_labels(examples):
    tokenized_inputs = tokenizer(examples["tokens"],
        truncation=True, is_split_into_words=True)
    labels = []
    for i, label in enumerate(examples["ner_tags"]):
        word_ids = \
            tokenized_inputs.word_ids(batch_index=i)
        previous_word_idx = None
        label_ids = []
        for word_idx in word_ids:
            if word_idx is None:
                label_ids.append(-100)
            elif word_idx != previous_word_idx:
                    label_ids.append(label[word_idx])
            else:
                    label_ids.append(label[word_idx] if \
                        label_all_tokens else -100)
            previous_word_idx = word_idx
        labels.append(label_ids)
    tokenized_inputs["labels"] = labels
    return tokenized_inputs

8.

This function will make sure that our tokens and labels are aligned properly. This alignment is
required because the tokens are tokenized in pieces, but the words must be one piece. To test
and see how this function works, you can run it by giving a single sample to it:
q = tokenize_and_align_labels(conll2003['train'][4:5])
print(q)

The result is shown as follows:
>>> {'input_ids': [[101, 2762, 1005, 1055, 4387, 2000, 1996,
2647, 2586, 1005, 1055, 15651, 2837, 14121, 1062, 9328, 5804,
2056, 2006, 9317, 10390, 2323, 4965, 8351, 4168, 4017, 2013,
3032, 2060, 2084, 3725, 2127, 1996, 4045, 6040, 2001, 24509,
1012, 102]], 'token_type_ids': [[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]], 'attention_mask': [[1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]], 'labels': [[-100, 5,
0, -100, 0, 0, 0, 3, 4, 0, -100, 0, 0, 1, 2, -100, -100, 0, 0,
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, -100, -100, 0, 0, 0, 0, 5, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
-100]]}

167

168

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

9.

But this result is not readable, so you can run the following code to have a readable version:
for token, label in zip( tokenizer.convert_ids_to_tokens(
    q["input_ids"][0]),q["labels"][0]):
    print(f"{token:_<40} {label}")

The result is shown as follows:

Figure 6.8 – Result of the tokenize and align functions

Fine-tuning language models for NER

10. The mapping of this function to the dataset can be done by using the map function of the
datasets library:
tokenized_datasets = \
    conll2003.map(tokenize_and_align_labels, batched=True)

11. In the next step, we need to load the BERT model with the respective number of labels:
from transformers import AutoModelForTokenClassification
model = AutoModelForTokenClassification.from_pretrained(
    "bert-base-uncased", num_labels=9)

12. The model will be loaded and ready to be trained. In the next step, we must prepare the trainer
and training parameters:
from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
args = TrainingArguments(
    "test-ner",
    evaluation_strategy = "epoch",
    learning_rate=2e-5,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    weight_decay=0.01,
)

13. Preparing the data collator is required. It will apply batch operations on the training dataset to
use less memory and perform faster. You can do so as follows:
from transformers import DataCollatorForTokenClassification
data_collator = \
    DataCollatorForTokenClassification(tokenizer)

14. To be able to evaluate model performance, there are many metrics available for many tasks in
Hugging Face’s datasets library. We will be using the sequence evaluation metric for NER.
seqeval is a good Python framework for evaluating sequence tagging algorithms and models.
It is necessary to install the seqeval library:
pip install seqeval

15. Afterward, you can load the metric:
metric = datasets.load_metric("seqeval")

169

170

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

16. It is easily possible to see how the metric works by using the following code:
example = conll2003['train'][0]
label_list = \
    conll2003["train"].features["ner_tags"].feature.names
labels = [label_list[i] for i in example["ner_tags"]]
metric.compute(predictions=[labels], references=[labels])

The result is as follows:

Figure 6.9 – Output of the seqeval metric

Various metrics, such as accuracy, F1-score, precision, and recall, are computed for the
sample input.
17. The following function is used to compute the metrics:
import numpy as np def compute_metrics(p):
    predictions, labels = p
    predictions = np.argmax(predictions, axis=2)
    true_predictions = [
        [label_list[p] for (p, l) in zip(prediction, label) \
if l != -100]
        for prediction, label in zip(predictions, labels)]
    true_labels = [
        [label_list[l] for (p, l) in zip(prediction,
            label) if l != -100]
        for prediction, label in zip(predictions, labels)
    ]
    results = \
        metric.compute(predictions=true_predictions,
        references=true_labels)
    return {
    "precision": results["overall_precision"],
    "recall": results["overall_recall"],
    "f1": results["overall_f1"],
    "accuracy": results["overall_accuracy"],
    }

Fine-tuning language models for NER

18. The last step is to make a trainer and train it accordingly:
trainer = Trainer(
    model,
    args,
    train_dataset=tokenized_datasets["train"],
    eval_dataset=tokenized_datasets["validation"],
    data_collator=data_collator,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    compute_metrics=compute_metrics
)
trainer.train()

19. After running the train function of trainer, the result will be as follows:

Figure 6.10 – trainer results after running train

20. It is necessary to save the model and tokenizer after training:
model.save_pretrained("ner_model")
tokenizer.save_pretrained("tokenizer")

21. If you wish to use the model with the pipeline, you must read the config file and assign label2id
and id2label correctly according to the labels you have used in the label_list object:
id2label = {
    str(i): label for i,label in enumerate(label_list)
}
label2id = {
    label: str(i) for i,label in enumerate(label_list)
}
import json
config = json.load(open("ner_model/config.json"))
config["id2label"] = id2label
config["label2id"] = label2id
json.dump(config, open("ner_model/config.json","w"))

171

172

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

22. Afterward, it is easy to use the model as in the following example:
from transformers import pipeline
model = \
    AutoModelForTokenClassification.from_pretrained("ner_model")
nlp = \
    pipeline("ner", model=mmodel, tokenizer=tokenizer)
example = "I live in Istanbul"
ner_results = nlp(example)
print(ner_results)

23. The result will appear as seen here:
[{'entity': 'B-LOC', 'score': 0.9983942, 'index': 4, 'word':
'istanbul', 'start': 10, 'end': 18}]

Fine-tuning on a specific dataset, domain, or even language makes the model perform much better.
However, there are certain pros and cons to this kind of fine-tuning; the dataset should be broad in a
sense to cover the actual domain that we are going to use. As an example, the model fine-tuned with
the given data (as shown in the previous example) will not perform very well in the medical domain.
Up to this point, you have learned how to apply POS using BERT. You have learned how to train your
own POS tagging model using Transformers and you also tested the model. In the next section, we
will focus on QA.

Question answering using token classification
A QA problem is generally defined as an NLP problem with a given text and a question for AI, and
getting an answer back. Usually, this answer can be found in the original text but there are different
approaches to this problem. In the case of Visual Question Answering (VQA), the question is about
a visual entity or visual concept rather than text but the question itself is in the form of text.
Some examples of VQA are as follows:

Figure 6.11 – VQA examples

Question answering using token classification

Most of the models that are intended to be used in VQA are multimodal models that can understand
the visual context along with the question and generate the answer properly. However, unimodal fully
textual QA or just QA is based on textual context and textual questions with respective textual answers:
SQUAD is one of the most well-known datasets in the field of QA. To see examples of SQUAD and
examine them, you can use the following code:
from pprint import pprint
from datasets import load_dataset
squad = load_dataset("squad")
for item in squad["train"][1].items():
    print(item[0])
    pprint(item[1])
    print("="*20)

The following is the result:
answers
{'answer_start': [188], 'text': ['a copper statue of Christ']}
====================
Context
('Architecturally, the school has a Catholic character. Atop the
Main ' "Building's gold dome is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary.
Immediately in " 'front of the Main Building and facing it, is a
copper statue of Christ with ' 'arms upraised with the legend "Venite
Ad Me Omnes". Next to the Main ' 'Building is the Basilica of the
Sacred Heart. Immediately behind the ' 'basilica is the Grotto, a
Marian place of prayer and reflection. It is a ' 'replica of the
grotto at Lourdes, France where the Virgin Mary reputedly ' 'appeared
to Saint Bernadette Soubirous in 1858. At the end of the main drive '
'(and in a direct line that connects through 3 statues and the Gold
Dome), is ' 'a simple, modern stone statue of Mary.')
====================
Id
'5733be284776f4190066117f'
====================
Question
'What is in front of the Notre Dame Main Building?'
====================
Title
'University_of_Notre_Dame'
====================

However, there is a version 2 of the SQUAD dataset, which has more training samples, and it is highly
recommended to use it. To have an overall understanding of how it is possible to train a model for a
QA problem, we will focus on the current part of this problem., training on textual question answering
using SQUAD dataset:

173

174

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

1.

To start, load SQUAD version 2 using the following code:
from datasets import load_dataset
squad = load_dataset("squad_v2")

2.

After loading the SQUAD dataset, you can see the details of this dataset by using the following code:
squad

The result is as follows:

Figure 6.12 – SQUAD dataset (version 2) details

The details of the SQUAD dataset will be shown as seen in Figure 6.12. As you can see, there
are more than 130,000 training samples with more than 11,000 validation samples.
3.

As we did for NER, we must preprocess the data to have the right form to be used by the model.
To do so, you must first load your tokenizer, which is a pretrained tokenizer as long as you are
using a pretrained model and want to fine-tune it for a QA problem:
from transformers import AutoTokenizer
model = "distilbert-base-uncased"
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model)

As you have seen, we are going to use the distilBERT model.
For our SQUAD example, we need to input more than one text to the model, one for the question
and one for the context. Accordingly, we need our tokenizer to put them side by side and
separate them with the special [SEP] token because distilBERT is a BERT-based model.
There is another problem in the scope of QA, and it is the size of the context. The context size
can be longer than the model input size, but we cannot reduce it to the size the model accepts.
With some specific NLP tasks we can truncate the input, but in QA, it is possible that the
answer is in the truncated part. We will show you an example where we tackle this problem
using document stride.
4.

The following is an example to show how it works using tokenizer:
max_length = 384
doc_stride = 128
example = squad["train"][173]

Question answering using token classification

tokenized_example = tokenizer(
    example["question"],
    example["context"],
    max_length=max_length,
    truncation="only_second",
    return_overflowing_tokens=True,
    stride=doc_stride
)

5.

The stride is same as the document stride that is used to return the stride for the second part,
like a window, while the return_overflowing_tokens flag gives the model information
on whether it should return the extra tokens. The result of tokenized_example is more
than a single tokenized output, instead having two input IDs. In the following code snippet,
you can see the result:
len(tokenized_example['input_ids'])
2

6.

Accordingly, you can see the full result by running the following for loop:
for input_ids in tokenized_example["input_ids"][:2]:
    print(tokenizer.decode(input_ids))
    print("-"*50)

The result is as follows:
[CLS] beyonce got married in 2008 to whom? [SEP] on april
4, 2008, beyonce married jay z. she publicly revealed their
marriage in a video montage at the listening party for her third
studio album, i am... sasha fierce, in manhattan's sony club on
october 22, 2008. i am... sasha fierce was released on november
18, 2008 in the united states. the album formally introduces
beyonce's alter ego sasha fierce, conceived during the making
of her 2003 single " crazy in love ", selling 482, 000 copies
in its first week, debuting atop the billboard 200, and giving
beyonce her third consecutive number - one album in the us. the
album featured the number - one song " single ladies ( put a
ring on it ) " and the top - five songs " if i were a boy " and
" halo ". achieving the accomplishment of becoming her longest
- running hot 100 single in her career, " halo "'s success in
the us helped beyonce attain more top - ten singles on the list
than any other woman during the 2000s. it also included the
successful " sweet dreams ", and singles " diva ", " ego ", "
broken - hearted girl " and " video phone ". the music video
for " single ladies " has been parodied and imitated around the
world, spawning the " first major dance craze " of the internet
age according to the toronto star. the video has won several
awards, including best video at the 2009 mtv europe music
awards, the 2009 scottish mobo awards, and the 2009 bet awards.
at the 2009 mtv video music awards, the video was nominated for
nine awards, ultimately winning three including video of the

175

176

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

year. its failure to win the best female video category, which
went to american country pop singer taylor swift's " you belong
with me ", led to kanye west interrupting the ceremony and
beyonce [SEP]
-------------------------------------------------[CLS] beyonce got married in 2008 to whom? [SEP] single ladies
" has been parodied and imitated around the world, spawning the
" first major dance craze " of the internet age according to
the toronto star. the video has won several awards, including
best video at the 2009 mtv europe music awards, the 2009
scottish mobo awards, and the 2009 bet awards. at the 2009 mtv
video music awards, the video was nominated for nine awards,
ultimately winning three including video of the year. its
failure to win the best female video category, which went to
american country pop singer taylor swift's " you belong with
me ", led to kanye west interrupting the ceremony and beyonce
improvising a re - presentation of swift's award during her
own acceptance speech. in march 2009, beyonce embarked on the i
am... world tour, her second headlining worldwide concert tour,
consisting of 108 shows, grossing $ 119. 5 million. [SEP]
--------------------------------------------------

As you can see from the preceding output, with a window of 128 tokens, the rest of the context
is replicated again in the second output of input IDs.
Another problem is the end span, which is not available in the dataset, but instead, the start
span or the start character for the answer is given. It is easy to find the length of the answer
and add it to the start span, which would automatically yield the end span.
7.

Now that we know all the details of this dataset and how to deal with them, we can easily put
them together to make a preprocessing function (https://github.com/huggingface/
transformers/blob/master/examples/pytorch/question-answering/
run_qa.py).

8.

This function gets examples as input:
def prepare_train_features(examples):

9.

The next step is to tokenize the examples:
    # tokenize examples
    tokenized_examples = tokenizer(
        examples["question" if pad_on_right else "context"],
        examples["context" if pad_on_right else "question"],
        truncation="only_second" if pad_on_right else
"only_first",
        max_length=max_length,
        stride=doc_stride,
        return_overflowing_tokens=True,

Question answering using token classification

        return_offsets_mapping=True,
        padding="max_length",
    )

10. Now we need to map from a feature to its example:
    sample_mapping = \
        tokenized_examples.pop("overflow_to_sample_mapping")
    offset_mapping = tokenized_examples.pop("offset_mapping")
    tokenized_examples["start_positions"] = []
    tokenized_examples["end_positions"] = []

Impossible to answer examples should be CLS and also start and end tokens for each one
should be added as well:
    for i, offsets in enumerate(offset_mapping):
        input_ids = tokenized_examples["input_ids"][i]
        cls_index = input_ids.index(tokenizer.cls_token_id)
        sequence_ids = tokenized_examples.sequence_ids(i)
        sample_index = sample_mapping[i]
        answers = examples["answers"][sample_index]
        if len(answers["answer_start"]) == 0:
            tokenized_examples["start_positions"].\
                append(cls_index)
            tokenized_examples["end_positions"].\
                append(cls_index)
        else:
            start_char = answers["answer_start"][0]
            end_char = \
                start_char + len(answers["text"][0])
            token_start_index = 0
            while sequence_ids[token_start_index] != \
                (1 if pad_on_right else 0):
                token_start_index += 1
            token_end_index = len(input_ids) - 1
            while sequence_ids[token_end_index] != \
                (1 if pad_on_right else 0):
                token_end_index -= 1
            if not (offsets[token_start_index][0] <= \
                start_char and offsets[token_end_index][1] >= \
end_char):
                tokenized_examples["start_positions"].append(
cls_index)

177

178

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

                tokenized_examples["end_positions"].append(
cls_index)
            else:
                while token_start_index < len(offsets) and \
offsets[token_start_index][0] <= start_char:
                    token_start_index += 1
               tokenized_examples["start_positions"].
append(token_start_index - 1)
                while offsets[token_end_index][1] >= end_char:
                    token_end_index -= 1
                tokenized_examples["end_positions"].
append(token_end_index + 1)
    return tokenized_examples

11. Mapping this function to the dataset would apply all the required changes:
tokenized_datasets = squad.map(prepare_train_features,
    batched=True, remove_columns=squad["train"].column_names)

12. Just like other examples, you can now load a pretrained model to be fine-tuned:
from transformers import (
    AutoModelForQuestionAnswering, TrainingArguments, Trainer)
model = AutoModelForQuestionAnswering.from_pretrained(model)

13. The next step is to create training arguments:
args = TrainingArguments(
    "test-squad",
    evaluation_strategy = "epoch",
    learning_rate=2e-5,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    weight_decay=0.01,
)

14. If we are not going to use a data collator, we will give a default data collator to the model trainer:
from transformers import default_data_collator
data_collator = default_data_collator

15. Now, everything is ready to make the trainer:
trainer = Trainer(
    model,
    args,

Question answering using token classification

    train_dataset=tokenized_datasets["train"],
    eval_dataset=tokenized_datasets["validation"],
    data_collator=data_collator,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
)

16. The trainer can be used with the train function:
trainer.train()

The result will be something like the following:

Figure 6.13 – Training results

As you can see, the model is trained with three epochs and the outputs for loss in validation
and training are reported.
17. Like any other model, you can easily save this model by using the following function:
trainer.save_model("distilBERT_SQUAD")

If you want to use your saved model or any other model that is trained on QA, the transformers
library provides a pipeline that’s easy to use and implement with no extra effort.
18. By using this pipeline functionality, you can use any model. The following is an example of
using a model with the QA pipeline:
from transformers import pipeline
qa_model = pipeline('question-answering',
    model='distilbert-base-cased-distilled-squad',
    tokenizer='distilbert-base-cased')

The pipeline just requires two inputs to make the model ready for usage, the model and
the tokenizer. However, you are also required to give it a pipeline type, which is QA in the
given example.
19. The next step is to give it the inputs it requires, context and question:
question = squad["validation"][0]["question"]
context = squad["validation"][0]["context"]

179

180

Fine-Tuning Language Models for Token Classification

The question and the context can be seen by using following code:
print("Question:")
print(question)
print("Context:")
print(context)
Question:
In what country is Normandy located?
Context:
('The Normans (Norman: Nourmands; French: Normands; Latin:
Normanni) were the ' 'people who in the 10th and 11th centuries
gave their name to Normandy, a ' 'region in France. They were
descended from Norse ("Norman" comes from ' '"Norseman") raiders
and pirates from Denmark, Iceland and Norway who, under ' 'their
leader Rollo, agreed to swear fealty to King Charles III of
West ' 'Francia. Through generations of assimilation and mixing
with the native ' 'Frankish and Roman-Gaulish populations, their
descendants would gradually ' 'merge with the Carolingianbased cultures of West Francia. The distinct ' 'cultural and
ethnic identity of the Normans emerged initially in the first '
'half of the 10th century, and it continued to evolve over the
succeeding ' 'centuries.')

20. The model can be used by the following example:
qa_model(question=question, context=context)

The result can be seen as follows:
{'answer': 'France', 'score': 0.9889379143714905, 'start': 159,
'end': 165,}

Up to this point, you have learned how you can train on the dataset you want. You have also learned
how you can use the trained model using pipelines. In the next section, you will learn how it is possible
to apply QA for many tasks as well.

Question answering for many tasks
The very nature of many languages allows us to bring many different NLP tasks into a simple paradigm,
QA. For example, given a sentiment classification task, one can argue that instead of classifying input
into classes (positive, negative, and neutral), we can use QA-based approaches to solve it. We can
redefine the input in this way:
Context: "I loved this movie!"
Question: "What best describes the sentiment of this text (Positive,
Negative, Neutral)?"
Answer: "Positive"

Summary

In this way, not only a single NLP task but also many other NLP tasks can be combined with only
a single token classifier. For example, different questions can be used to handle different NLP tasks.
As described in an earlier section, a set of questions and respective answers are required. But in this
very specific demonstration, not all of the answers come from the given context, but the answer can
be from the question itself!
Another example of this approach is to use QA for pronoun resolution. For example, with the following
format, one can use QA for pronoun resolution:
Context: "Meysam admired Savas. He was always fascinated about
his work."
Question: "What does He refer to in this text?"
Answer: "Meysam"
As you have seen, token classification can be used for many tasks. It is also possible to use token
classification for even more tasks than QA.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how to fine-tune a pretrained model for any token classification task.
Fine-tuning models on NER and QA problems was explored. Using pretrained and fine-tuned
models on specific tasks with pipelines was detailed with examples. We also learned about various
preprocessing steps for these two tasks. Saving pretrained models that are fine-tuned on specific tasks
was another major learning point of this chapter. We also saw how it is possible to train models with
a limited input size on tasks such as QA that have longer sequence sizes than the model input. Using
tokenizers more efficiently to have document splitting with document stride was another important
topic of this chapter too.
In the next chapter, we will discuss text representation methods using Transformers. By the end of
the chapter, you will learn how to perform zero- or few-shot learning and semantic text clustering.

181

7
Text Representation
So far, we have addressed the classification and generation problems with the transformers
library. Text representation is another crucial task in modern natural language processing (NLP),
especially for unsupervised tasks such as clustering, semantic search, and topic modeling. Representing
sentences by using various models such as Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) and Sentence-BERT
(SBERT) with additional frameworks such as SentenceTransformers will be explained here. Zero-shot
learning using BART will also be explained, and you will learn how to utilize it. Few-shot learning
methodologies and unsupervised use cases such as semantic text clustering and topic modeling
will also be described. Finally, one-shot learning use cases such as semantic search will be covered.
Although embedding and text representation models are mostly based on semantic paradigms or
specific topics, we will also discuss how instruction fine-tuned embedding models can help solve
diverse tasks.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Introducing sentence embeddings
• Benchmarking sentence similarity models
• Using BART for zero-shot learning
• Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR
• Text clustering with Sentence-BERT
• Semantic search with Sentence-BERT
• Instruction fine-tuned embedding models

184

Text Representation

Technical requirements
We will be using a Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises. For this, you will need Python 3.6+
and the following packages:
• sklearn
• transformers >=4.00
• datasets
• sentence-transformers
• tensorflow-hub
• flair
• umap-learn
• bertopic
All the notebooks for the coding exercises in this chapter will be available at the following GitHub
link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-SecondEdition

Introduction to sentence embeddings
Pretrained BERT models do not produce efficient and independent sentence embeddings as they
always need to be fine-tuned in an end-to-end supervised setting. This is because we can think of a
pretrained BERT model as an indivisible whole and semantics is spread across all layers, not just the
final layer. Without fine-tuning, it may be ineffective to use its internal representations independently.
It is also hard to handle unsupervised tasks such as clustering, topic modeling, information retrieval,
or semantic search. Because we have to evaluate many sentence pairs during clustering tasks, for
instance, this causes massive computational overhead.
Luckily, many modifications have been made to the original BERT model, such as SBERT, to derive
semantically meaningful and independent sentence embeddings. SBERT employs a particular objective
function in comparison to BERT. In this approach, sentences can be paired via a twin network and
evaluated in terms of similarity. We will talk about these approaches in a moment. In the NLP literature,
many neural sentence embedding methods have been proposed for mapping a single sentence to a
common feature space (vector space model) wherein a cosine function (or dot product) is usually
used to measure similarity and the Euclidean distance to measure dissimilarity.

Introduction to sentence embeddings

The following are some applications that can be efficiently solved with sentence embeddings:
• Sentence-pair tasks
• Information retrieval
• Question answering
• Duplicate question detection
• Paraphrase detection
• Document clustering
• Topic modeling
The simplest but most efficient kind of neural sentence embedding is the average-pooling operation,
which is performed on the embeddings of words in a sentence. To get a better representation of this,
some early neural methods learned sentence embeddings in an unsupervised fashion, such as Doc2Vec,
Skip-Thought, FastSent, and Sent2Vec. Doc2Vec utilized a token-level distributional theory
and an objective function to predict adjacent words, similar to word2Vec. The approach injects an
additional memory token (called Paragraph-ID) into each sentence, which is reminiscent of CLS
or SEP tokens in the transformers library. This additional token acts as a piece of memory that
represents the context or document embeddings. SkipThought and FastSent are considered
sentence-level approaches, where the objective function is used to predict adjacent sentences. These
models extract the sentence’s meaning to obtain necessary information from the adjacent sentences
and their context.
Some other methods, such as InferSent, leveraged supervised learning and multi-task transfer
learning to learn generic sentence embeddings. InferSent trained various supervised tasks to get
more efficient embedding. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)-based supervised models, such as
GRU)or Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), the last hidden state (or stacked entire hidden states) to
obtain sentence embeddings in a supervised setting. We touched on the RNN approach in Chapter 1.

Cross-encoder versus bi-encoder
So far, we have discussed how to train transformer-based language models and fine-tune them in
semi-supervised and supervised settings, respectively. As we learned in the previous chapters, we got
successful results thanks to the transformer architectures. Once a task-specific thin linear layer has been
put on top of a pretrained model, all the weights of the network (not only the last task-specific thin
layer) are fine-tuned with task-specific labeled data. We also experienced how the BERT architecture
has been fine-tuned for two different groups of tasks (single sentence or sentence pair) without any

185

186

Text Representation

architectural modifications being required. The only difference is that for the sentence-pair tasks, the
sentences are concatenated and marked with a SEP token. Thus, self-attention is applied to all the
tokens of the concatenated sentences. This is a big advantage of the BERT model, where both input
sentences can get the necessary information from each other at every layer. In the end, they are encoded
simultaneously. This is called cross-encoding.
However, there are two disadvantages regarding the cross-encoders that were addressed by the SBERT
authors and Humeau et al., 2019, as follows:
• The cross-encoder setup is not convenient for many sentence-pair tasks due to too many
possible combinations needing to be processed. For instance, to get the two closest sentences
from a list of 1,000 sentences, the cross-encoder model (BERT) requires around 500,000 (n
* (n-1) /2) inference computations. Therefore, it would be very slow compared to alternative
solutions such as SBERT or Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) and similarity functions can
be performed efficiently on modern architectures. Moreover, with the help of an optimized
index structure, we can reduce computational complexity from many hours to a few minutes
when comparing or clustering many documents.
• Due to its supervised characteristics, the BERT model can’t derive independent meaningful
sentence embeddings. It is hard to leverage a pretrained BERT model as is for unsupervised
tasks such as clustering, semantic search, or topic modeling. The BERT model produces a
fixed-size vector for each token in a document. In an unsupervised setting, the documentlevel representation may be obtained by averaging or pooling token vectors, plus SEP and CLS
tokens. Later, we will see that such a representation of BERT produces below-average sentence
embeddings and that its performance scores are usually worse than word embedding pooling
techniques such as Word2Vec, FastText, or GloVe.
Alternatively, bi-encoders (such as SBERT) independently map a sentence pair to a semantic vector
space, as shown in the following diagram. Since the representations are separate, bi-encoders can
cache the encoded input representation for each input, resulting in fast inference time. One of the
successful bi-encoder modifications of BERT is SBERT. Based on the Siamese and Triplet network
structures, SBERT fine-tunes the BERT model to produce semantically meaningful and independent
embeddings of the sentences.
The following diagram shows the bi-encoder architecture:

Benchmarking sentence similarity models

Figure 7.1 – Bi-encoder architecture

You can find hundreds of pretrained SBERT models that have been trained with different objectives
at https://public.ukp.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/reimers/sentencetransformers/v0.2/.
We will use some of them in the next section.

Benchmarking sentence similarity models
There are many semantic textual similarity models available, but it is highly recommended that you
benchmark and understand their capabilities and differences using metrics. Papers With Code provides
a list of these datasets at https://paperswithcode.com/task/semantic-textualsimilarity.
Also, there are many model outputs in each dataset that are ranked by their results. These results have
been taken from the aforementioned article.
General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) provides most of these datasets and tests,
but it is not only for semantic textual similarity. GLUE is a general benchmark for evaluating a model
with different NLP characteristics. More details about the GLUE dataset and its usage were provided
in Chapter 2. Let’s take a look at it before we move on:
1.

To load the metrics and some datasets, we import datasets functions as follows:
from datasets import load_metric, load_dataset

187

188

Text Representation

2.

Let’s assume the model produces values and that these values are stored in an array called
predictions. You can easily use this metric with the predictions to see the F1 and
accuracy values:
labels = [i['label'] for i in dataset['test']]
metric.compute(predictions=predictions, references=labels)

3.

Some semantic textual similarity datasets such as Semantic Textual Similarity Benchmark
(STSB) have different metrics. For example, this benchmark uses Spearman and Pearson
correlations because the outputs and predictions are between 0 and 5 and are float numbers
instead of multiple 0 and 1 values, which is a regression problem. The following code shows
an example of this benchmark:
metric = load_metric('glue', 'stsb')
metric.compute(predictions=[1,2,3],references=[5,2,2])

The predictions are the model outputs, while the references are the dataset labels.
4.

To get a comparative result between the two models, we will use a distilled version of RoBERTa
and test these two on the STSB. To start, you must load both models. The following code shows
us how to install the required libraries before loading and using models:
pip install tensorflow-hub
pip install sentence-transformers

5.

As we mentioned previously, the next step is to load the dataset and metric:
from datasets import load_metric, load_dataset
stsb_metric = load_metric('glue', 'stsb')
stsb = load_dataset('glue', 'stsb')

6.

Afterward, we must load both models:
import tensorflow_hub as hub
use_model = hub.load(
    "https://tfhub.dev/google/universal-sentence-encoder/4")
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
distilroberta = SentenceTransformer(
    'stsb-distilroberta-base-v2')

7.

Both of these models provide embeddings for a given sentence. To compare the similarity
between two sentences, we will use cosine similarity. The following function takes sentences
as a batch and provides cosine similarity for each pair by utilizing USE:
import tensorflow as tf
import math
def use_sts_benchmark(batch):

Benchmarking sentence similarity models

    sts_encode1 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        use_model(tf.constant(batch['sentence1'])), axis=1)
    sts_encode2 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        use_model(tf.constant(batch['sentence2'])),   axis=1)
    cosine_similarities = tf.reduce_sum(
        tf.multiply(sts_encode1,sts_encode2),axis=1)
    clip_cosine_similarities = tf.clip_by_value(
        cosine_similarities,-1.0, 1.0)
    scores = 1.0 - \
        tf.acos(clip_cosine_similarities) / math.pi
return scores

8.

With small modifications, the same function can be used for RoBERTa, too. These small
modifications are only for replacing the embedding function, which is different for TensorFlow
Hub models and transformers. The following is the modified function:
def roberta_sts_benchmark(batch):
    sts_encode1 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        distilroberta.encode(batch['sentence1']), axis=1)
    sts_encode2 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        distilroberta.encode(batch['sentence2']), axis=1)
    cosine_similarities = tf.reduce_sum(
        tf.multiply(sts_encode1, sts_encode2),  axis=1)
    clip_cosine_similarities = tf.clip_by_value(
        cosine_similarities, -1.0, 1.0)
    scores = 1.0  - \
        tf.acos(clip_cosine_similarities) / math.pi
return scores

9.

Applying these functions to the dataset will result in similarity scores for each of the models:
use_results = use_sts_benchmark(stsb['validation'])
distilroberta_results = roberta_sts_benchmark(
    stsb['validation'])

10. Using metrics on both results produces the Spearman and Pearson correlation values:
results = {
    "USE":stsb_metric.compute(
        predictions=use_results,
        references=references),
    "DistilRoberta":stsb_metric.compute(
        predictions=distilroberta_results,
        references=references)
}

189

190

Text Representation

11. You can simply use pandas to see the results as a table in a comparative fashion:
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame(results)

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.2 – STSB validation results on DistilRoBERTa and USE

In this section, you learned about the important benchmarks of semantic textual similarity. Regardless
of the model, you learned how to use any of these metrics to quantify model performance. In the next
section, you will learn about the few-shot learning models.

Using BART for zero-shot learning
In the field of machine learning, zero-shot learning is referred to as a model that can perform a task
without explicitly being trained on it. In the case of NLP, it’s assumed that there’s a model that can
predict the probability of some text being assigned to classes that are given to the model. However,
the interesting part about this type of learning is that the model is not trained on these classes.
With the rise of many advanced language models that can perform transfer learning, zero-shot learning
came to life. In the case of NLP, this kind of learning is performed by NLP models at test time, where
the model sees samples belonging to new classes where no samples of them were seen before.
This kind of learning is usually used for classification tasks, where both the classes and the text are
represented and the semantic similarity of both is compared. The represented form of these two is an
embedding vector, while the similarity metric (such as cosine similarity or a pretrained classifier such
as a dense layer) outputs the probability of the sentence/text being classified as the class.
There are many methods and schemes we can use to train such models, but one of the earliest methods
used crawled pages from the internet containing keyword tags in the meta part. For more information,
read the following article and blog post at https://amitness.com/2020/05/zero-shottext-classification/.
Instead of using such huge data, there are language models such as BART that use the Multi-Genre
Natural Language Inference (MultiNLI) dataset to fine-tune and detect the relationship between two
different sentences. Also, the Hugging Face model repository contains many models that have been
implemented for zero-shot learning. They also provide a zero-shot learning pipeline for ease of use.

Using BART for zero-shot learning

For example, BART, from Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) at Meta, is being used in the following
code to perform zero-shot text classification:
from transformers import pipeline
import pandas as pd
classifier = pipeline("zero-shot-classification",
    model="facebook/bart-large-mnli")
sequence_to_classify = "one day I will see the world"
candidate_labels = ['travel',
    'cooking',
    'dancing',
    'exploration']
result = classifier(sequence_to_classify, candidate_labels)
pd.DataFrame(result)

The results are as follows:

Figure 7.3 – Results of zero-shot learning using BART

As you can see, the travel and exploration labels have the highest probability, but the most
probable one is travel.
However, sometimes, one sample can belong to more than one class (multilabel). Hugging Face
provides a parameter called multi_label for this. The following example uses this parameter:
result = classifier(sequence_to_classify,
    candidate_labels,
    multi_label=True)
Pd.DataFrame(result)

191

192

Text Representation

Due to this, it is changed to the following:

Figure 7.4 – Results of zero-shot learning using BART (multi_label = True)

You can test the results even further and see how the model performs if very similar labels to the
travel label are used. For example, you can see how it performs if moving and going are added
to the label list.
There are other models that also leverage the semantic similarity between labels and the context to
perform zero-shot classification. In the case of few-shot learning, some samples are given to the model,
but these samples are not enough to train a model alone. Models can use these samples to perform
tasks such as semantic text clustering, which will be explained shortly.
Now that you’ve learned how to use BART for zero-shot learning, you should learn how it works.
BART is fine-tuned on natural language inference (NLI) datasets such as MultiNLI. These datasets
contain sentence pairs and three classes for each pair. The class labels are Neutral, Entailment,
and Contradiction. Models that have been trained on these datasets can capture the semantics
of two sentences and classify them by assigning a label in the one-hot format. If you take out the
Neutral labels and only use Entailment and Contradiction as your output labels, if two sentences
can come after each other, then it means these two are closely related to each other. In other words,
you can change the first sentence to the label (travel, for example) and the second sentence to the
content (one day I will see the world, for example). According to this, if these two can
come after each other, this means that the label and the content are semantically related. The following
code example shows how to directly use the BART model without the zero-shot classification pipeline
according to the preceding descriptions:
from transformers import (
    AutoModelForSequenceClassification, AutoTokenizer)
nli_model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained(
    "facebook/bart-large-mnli")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer\
    .from_pretrained(
    "facebook/bart-large-mnli")

Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR

premise = "one day I will see the world"
label = "travel"
hypothesis = f'This example is {label}.'
x = tokenizer.encode(
    premise,
    hypothesis,
    return_tensors='pt',
    truncation_strategy='only_first')
logits = nli_model(x)[0]
entail_contradiction_logits = logits[:,[0,2]]
probs = entail_contradiction_logits.softmax(dim=1)
prob_label_is_true = probs[:,1]
print(prob_label_is_true)

The result is as follows:
tensor([0.9945], grad_fn=<SelectBackward>)

You can also call the first sentence the hypothesis and the sentence containing the label the premise.
According to the result, the premise can entail the hypothesis, which means that the hypothesis is
labeled as the premise.
So far, you’ve learned how to use zero-shot learning by utilizing NLI fine-tuned models. Next, you will
learn how to perform few- or one-shot learning using semantic text clustering and semantic search.

Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR
In this experiment, we will qualitatively evaluate the sentence representation models thanks to the
flair library, which really simplifies obtaining the document embeddings for us.
We will perform experiments while taking on the following approaches:
• Document average pool embeddings
• RNN-based embeddings
• BERT embeddings
• SBERT embeddings
We need to install these libraries before we can start the experiments:
!pip install sentence-transformers
!pip install dataset
!pip install flair

193

194

Text Representation

For qualitative evaluation, we define a list of similar sentence pairs and a list of dissimilar sentence
pairs (five pairs for each). What we expect from the embedding models is that they should measure
a high score and a low score, respectively.
The sentence pairs are extracted from the Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) Benchmark dataset,
which we are already familiar with from the sentence-pair regression part of Chapter 6. For similar
pairs, two sentences are completely equivalent, and they share the same meaning.
The pairs with a similarity score of around 5 in the STS-B dataset are randomly taken, as follows:
import pandas as pd
similar=[
     ("A black dog walking beside a pool.",
    "A black dog is walking along the side of a pool."),
     ("A blonde woman looks for medical supplies for work in
a  suitcase. ",
    " The blond woman is searching for medical supplies in
a  suitcase."),
     ("A doubly decker red bus driving down the road.",
    "A red double decker bus driving down a street."),
    ("There is a black dog jumping into a swimming pool.",
    "A black dog is leaping into a swimming pool."),
    ("The man used a sword to slice a plastic bottle.",
    "A man sliced a plastic bottle with a sword.")]
pd.DataFrame(similar, columns=["sen1", "sen2"])

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.5 – Similar pair list

Here is the list of dissimilar sentences whose similarity scores are around 0, taken from the
STS benchmark(https://huggingface.co/datasets/glue/viewer/stsb):
import pandas as pd
dissimilar= [
    ("A little girl and boy are reading books. ",

Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR

        "An older child is playing with a doll while gazing out the
window."),
    ("Two horses standing in a field with trees in the background.",
        "A black and white bird on a body of water with grass in the
background."),
    ("Two people are walking by the ocean.",
        "Two men in fleeces and hats looking at the camera."),
    ("A cat is pouncing on a trampoline.",
        "A man is slicing a tomato."),
    ("A woman is riding on a horse.",
        "A man is turning over tables in anger.")]
pd.DataFrame(dissimilar, columns=["sen1", "sen2"])

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.6 – Dissimilar pair list

Now, let’s prepare the necessary functions to evaluate the embedding models. The following sim()
function computes the cosine similarity between two sentences; that is, s1 and s2:
import torch, numpy as np
def sim(s1,s2):
    s1=s1.embedding.unsqueeze(0)
    s2=s2.embedding.unsqueeze(0)
    sim=torch.cosine_similarity(s1,s2).item()
    return np.round(sim,2)

The document embedding models that were used in this experiment are all pretrained models. We
will pass the document embeddingsmodel object and sentence pair list (similar or dissimilar) to
the following evaluate() function, where, once the model encodes the sentence embeddings, it
will compute the similarity score for each pair in the list, along with the list average. The definition
of the function is as follows:
from flair.data import Sentence
def evaluate(embeddings, myPairList):
    scores=[]

195

196

Text Representation

    for s1, s2 in myPairList:
        s1,s2=Sentence(s1), Sentence(s2)
        embeddings.embed(s1)
        embeddings.embed(s2)
        score=sim(s1,s2)
        scores.append(score)
    return scores, np.round(np.mean(scores),2)

Now, it is time to evaluate sentence embedding models. We will start with the average pooling method!

Average word embeddings
Average word embeddings (or document pooling) apply the mean pooling operation to all the words
in a sentence, where the average of all the word embeddings is considered to be sentence embedding.
The following execution instantiates a document pool embedding based on GloVe vectors. Note
that although we will use only GloVe vectors here, the FLAIRAPI allows us to use multiple word
embeddings. Here is the code definition:
from flair.data import Sentence
from flair.embeddings import (
    WordEmbeddings, DocumentPoolEmbeddings)
glove_embedding = WordEmbeddings('glove')
glove_pool_embeddings = DocumentPoolEmbeddings(
    [glove_embedding])

Let’s evaluate the GloVe pool model on similar pairs, as follows:
evaluate(glove_pool_embeddings, similar)
([0.97, 0.99, 0.97, 0.99, 0.98], 0.98)

The results seem to be good since those resulting values are very high, which is what we expect. However,
the model produces high scores such as 0.94 on average for the dissimilar list as well. Our expectation
would be less than 0.4. We’ll talk about why we got this later in this chapter. Here is the execution:
evaluate(glove_pool_embeddings, dissimilar)
([0.94, 0.97, 0.94, 0.92, 0.93], 0.94)

Next, let’s evaluate some RNN embeddings on the same problem.

Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR

RNN-based document embeddings
Let’s instantiate a GRU model based on GloVe embeddings, where the default model of
DocumentRNNEmbeddings is a GRU:
from flair.embeddings import (
    WordEmbeddings, DocumentRNNEmbeddings)
gru_embeddings = DocumentRNNEmbeddings([glove_embedding])

Run the evaluation method:
evaluate(gru_embeddings, similar)
([0.99, 1.0, 0.94, 1.0, 0.92], 0.97)
evaluate(gru_embeddings, dissimilar)
([0.86, 1.0, 0.91, 0.85, 0.9], 0.9)

Likewise, we get a high score for the dissimilar list. This is not what we want from sentence embeddings.

Transformer-based BERT embeddings
The following execution instantiates a bert-base-uncased model that pools the final layer:
from flair.embeddings import TransformerDocumentEmbeddings
from flair.data import Sentence
bert_embeddings = TransformerDocumentEmbeddings(
    'bert-base-uncased')

Run the evaluation, as follows:
evaluate(bert_embeddings, similar)
([0.85, 0.9, 0.96, 0.91, 0.89], 0.9)
evaluate(bert_embeddings, dissimilar)
([0.93, 0.94, 0.86, 0.93, 0.92], 0.92)

This is worse! The score of the dissimilar list is higher than that of the similar list.

SBERT embeddings
Now, let’s apply SBERT to the problem of distinguishing similar pairs from dissimilar ones, as follows:
1.

First of all, a warning: we need to ensure that the sentence-transformers package has
already been installed:
!pip install sentence-transformers

197

198

Text Representation

2.

As we mentioned previously, SBERT provides a variety of pretrained models. We will pick the
bert-base-nli-mean-tokens model for evaluation. Here is the code:
from flair.data import Sentence
from flair.embeddings import (
    SentenceTransformerDocumentEmbeddings)
sbert_embeddings = SentenceTransformerDocumentEmbeddings(
    'bert-base-nli-mean-tokens')

3.

Let’s evaluate the model:
evaluate(sbert_embeddings, similar)
([0.98, 0.95, 0.96, 0.99, 0.98], 0.97)
evaluate(sbert_embeddings, dissimilar)
([0.48, 0.41, 0.19, -0.05, 0.0], 0.21)

Well done! The SBERT model produced better results. The model produced a low similarity
score for the dissimilar list, which is what we expect.
4.

Now, we will do a harder test, where we pass contradicting sentences to the models. We will
define some tricky sentence pairs, as follows:
tricky_pairs=[
("An elephant is bigger than a lion",
"A lion is bigger than an elephant") ,
("the cat sat on the mat",
"the mat sat on the cat")]
evaluate(glove_pool_embeddings, tricky_pairs)
([1.0, 1.0], 1.0)
evaluate(gru_embeddings, tricky_pairs)
([0.87, 0.65], 0.76)
evaluate(bert_embeddings, tricky_pairs)
([1.0, 0.98], 0.99)
evaluate(sbert_embeddings, tricky_pairs)
([0.93, 0.97], 0.95)

Interesting! The scores are very high since the sentence similarity model works similarly to topic
detection and measures content similarity. When we look at the sentences, they share the same
content, even though they contradict each other. The content is about a lion and elephant or cat
and mat. Therefore, the models produce a high similarity score. Since the GloVe embedding
method pools the average of the words without caring about word order, it measures two
sentences as being the same. On the other hand, the GRU model produced lower values as it
cares about word order. Surprisingly, even the SBERT model does not produce efficient scores.
This may be due to the content similarity-based supervision that’s used in the SBERT model.

Semantic similarity experiment with FLAIR

5.

To correctly detect the semantics of two sentence pairs with three classes – that is, Neutral,
Contradiction, and Entailment – we must use a fine-tuned model on MultiNLI. The
following code block shows an example of using XLM-RoBERTa, fine-tuned on XNLI with
the same examples:
from transformers Import (
    AutoModelForSequenceClassification, AutoTokenizer)
nli_model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained(
        'joeddav/xlm-roberta-large-xnli')
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    'joeddav/xlm-roberta-large-xnli')
import numpy as np
for permise, hypothesis in tricky_pairs:
    x = tokenizer.encode(premise,
        hypothesis,
        return_tensors='pt',
        truncation_strategy='only_first')
    logits = nli_model(x)[0]
    print(f"Permise: {permise}")
    print(f"Hypothesis: {hypothesis}")
    print("Top Class:")
    print(nli_model.config.id2label[np.argmax(
        logits[0].detach().numpy()). ])
    print("Full softmax scores:")
    for i in range(3):
        print(nli_model.config.id2label[i],
            logits.softmax(dim=1)[0][i].detach().numpy())
    print("="*20)

6.

The output will show the correct labels for each:
Premise: An elephant is bigger than a lion
Hypothesis: A lion is bigger than an elephant
Top Class:
contradiction
Full softmax scores:
contradiction 0.7731286
neutral 0.2203285
entailment 0.0065428796
====================
Premise: the cat sat on the mat
Hypothesis: the mat sat on the cat
Top Class:

199

200

Text Representation

entailment
Full softmax scores:
contradiction 0.49365467
neutral 0.007260764
entailment 0.49908453
====================

The model proved successful for the first example, but it was inconclusive for the second example.
Now, we will apply clustering algorithms as unsupervised learning models to texts using SBERT.

Text clustering with Sentence-BERT
For clustering algorithms, we will need a model that’s suitable for textual similarity. Let’s use the
paraphrase-distilroberta-base-v1 model here for a change. We will start by loading
the Amazon Polarity dataset for our clustering experiment. This dataset includes Amazon web page
reviews spanning a period of 18 years up to March 2013. The original dataset includes over 35 million
reviews. These reviews include product information, user information, user ratings, and user reviews.
Let’s get started:
1.

First, randomly select 10 K reviews by shuffling, as follows:
import pandas as pd, numpy as np
import torch, os, scipy
from datasets import load_dataset
dataset = load_dataset("amazon_polarity",split="train")
corpus=dataset.shuffle(seed=42)[:10000]['content']

2.

The corpus is now ready for clustering. The following code instantiates a sentencetransformer object using the pretrained paraphrase-distilroberta-base-v1 model:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
model_path="paraphrase-distilroberta-base-v1"
model = SentenceTransformer(model_path)

3.

The entire corpus is encoded with the following execution, where the model maps a list of
sentences to a list of embedding vectors:
corpus_embeddings = model.encode(corpus)
corpus_embeddings.shape
(10000, 768)

4.

Here, the vector size is 768, which is the default embedding size of the BERT base model. From
now on, we will proceed with traditional clustering methods. We will choose k-means here since
it is a fast and widely used clustering algorithm. We just need to set the cluster number (k) to

Text clustering with Sentence-BERT

5. Actually, this number may not be optimal. There are many techniques that can determine
the optimal number of clusters, such as the elbow or silhouette method. However, let’s leave
these issues aside. Here is the execution:
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans
K=5
kmeans = KMeans(
    n_clusters=5,
    random_state=0).fit(corpus_embeddings)
cls_dist=pd.Series(kmeans.labels_).value_counts()
cls_dist
3 2772
4 2089
0 1911
2 1883
1 1345

Here, we have obtained five clusters of reviews. As we can see from the output, we have fairly distributed
clusters. Another issue with clustering is that we need to understand what these clusters mean.
As a suggestion, we can apply topic analysis to each cluster or check cluster-based TF-IDF (Term
Frequency – Inverse Document Frequency)to understand the content. Now, let’s look at another
way to do this based on the cluster centers. The k-means algorithm computes cluster centers, called
centroids, that are kept in the kmeans.cluster_centers_ attribute. The centroids are simply
the average of the vectors in each cluster. Therefore, they are all imaginary points, not the existing
data points. Let’s assume that the sentences closest to the centroid will be the most representative
example for the corresponding cluster.
Let’s try to find only one real sentence embedding, closest to each centroid point. If you like, you can
capture more than one sentence. Here is the code:
distances = scipy.spatial.distance.cdist(
    kmeans.cluster_centers_, corpus_embeddings)
centers={}
print("Cluster", "Size", "Center-idx",
    "Center-Example", sep="\t\t")
for i,d in enumerate(distances):
    ind = np.argsort(d, axis=0)[0]
    centers[i]=ind
    print(i,cls_dist[i], ind, corpus[ind] ,sep="\t\t")

201

202

Text Representation

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.7 – Centroids of the cluster

From these representative sentences, we can reason about the clusters. It seems to be that k-means
clusters the reviews into five distinct categories: Electronics, Audio CD/Music, DVD/Film, Books, and
Furniture and Home. Now, let’s visualize both sentence points and cluster centroids in a 2D space.
We will use the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) library to reduce
dimensionality. Other widely used dimensionality reduction techniques in NLP that you can use include
t-SNE (t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding) and principal component analysis, or PCA.
1.

We need to install the umap library, as follows:
!pip install umap-learn

2.

The following execution reduces all the embeddings and maps them into a 2D space:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import umap
X = umap.UMAP(
    n_components=2,
    min_dist=0.0).fit_transform(corpus_embeddings)
labels= kmeans.labels_fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12,8))
plt.scatter(X[:,0], X[:,1], c=labels, s=1, cmap='Paired')
for c in centers:
    plt.text(X[centers[c],0], X[centers[c], 1],"CLS-"+ str(c),
fontsize=18)
    plt.colorbar()

The output is as follows:

Text clustering with Sentence-BERT

Figure 7.8 – Cluster points visualization

In the preceding output, the points have been colored according to their cluster membership and
centroids. It looks like we have picked the right number of clusters.
To capture the topics and interpret the clusters, we located the sentences (one single sentence for each
cluster) close to the centroids of the clusters. Now, let’s look at a more accurate way of capturing the
topic with topic modeling.

Topic modeling with BERTopic
You may be familiar with many unsupervised topic modeling techniques that are used to extract
topics from documents; latent-Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic modeling and non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) are well-applied traditional techniques in the literature. BERTopic and top2Vec
are two important transformer-based topic modeling projects. In this section, we will apply the
BERTopic model to our Amazon corpus. It leverages BERT embeddings and the class-based TF-IDF
method to get easily interpretable topics.
First, the BERTopic model begins by encoding the sentences using sentence transformers or any
sentence embedding model. This is followed by the clustering step, which has two phases: reducing
the dimensionality of the embeddings using UMAP, and then clustering the reduced vectors using

203

204

Text Representation

hierarchical density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (HDBSCAN). This process
groups similar documents together. In the final stage, the topics are captured using cluster-wise TF-IDF.
Instead of extracting the most important words per document, the model extracts the most important
words per cluster, providing descriptions of the topics for each cluster. Let’s get started:
First, let’s install the necessary library, as follows:
!pip install bertopic

Important note
You may need to restart the runtime since this installation will update some packages that have
already been loaded. So, from the Jupyter Notebook, go to Runtime | Restart Runtime.
If you want to use your own embedding model, you need to instantiate and pass it through the BERTopic
model. We will instantiate a SentenceTransformer model and pass it to the constructor of
BERTopic, as follows:
from bertopic import BERTopic
sentence_model = SentenceTransformer(
    "paraphrase-distilroberta-base-v1")
topic_model = BERTopic(embedding_model=sentence_model)
topics, _ = topic_model.fit_transform(corpus)
topic_model.get_topic_info()[:6]

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.9 – BERTopic results

Please note that BERTopic runs with the same parameters can yield different results since the UMAP
model is stochastic. Now, let’s see the word distribution of the fifth topic, as follows:
topic_model.get_topic(5)

Semantic search with SBERT

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.10 – The fifth topic’s words of the topic model

The topic words are those words whose vectors are close to the topic vector in the semantic space. In
this experiment, we did not cluster the corpus; instead, we applied the technique to the entire corpus.
In our previous example, we analyzed the clusters with the closest sentence. Now, we can find the
topics by applying the topic model separately to each cluster. This is pretty straightforward, and you
can run it yourself.
Please see the top2Vec project for more details and interesting topic modeling applications
at https://github.com/ddangelov/Top2Vec.
In the next subsection, we will employ SBERT for semantic search.

Semantic search with SBERT
We may already be familiar with keyword-based search (Boolean model), where, for a given keyword
or pattern, we can retrieve the results that match the pattern. Alternatively, we can use regular
expressions, where we can define advanced patterns such as the lexico-syntactic pattern. These
traditional approaches cannot handle synonyms (for example, car is the same as automobile) or wordsense problems (for example, bank as the side of a river or bank as a financial institute). While the first
synonym case causes low recall due to missing the documents that shouldn’t be missed, the second
causes low precision due to catching the documents that were not being caught.
Let’s set up a case study for frequently asked questions (FAQs) that are idle on websites. We will
exploit FAQ resources within a semantic search problem. We will be using the FAQ from the World
Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), a nature non-governmental organization (https://www.wwf.
org.uk/).
Given these descriptions, it is easy to understand that performing a semantic search using semantic
models is very similar to a one-shot learning problem, where we just have a single shot of the class
(a single sample), and we want to reorder the rest of the data (sentences) according to it. You can
redefine the problem as searching for samples that are semantically close to the given sample, or a

205

206

Text Representation

binary classification according to the sample. Your model can provide a similarity metric, and the
results for all the other samples will be reordered using this metric. The final ordered list is the search
result, which is reordered according to semantic representation and the similarity metric.
WWF has 18 questions and answers on their web page. We defined them as a Python list object called
wf_faq for this experiment:
• I haven’t received my adoption pack. What should I do?
• How quickly will I receive my adoption pack?
• How can I renew my adoption?
• How do I change my address or other contact details?
• Can I adopt an animal if I don’t live in the UK?
• If I adopt an animal, will I be the only person who adopts that animal?
• My pack doesn’t contain a certificate?
• My adoption is a gift but won’t arrive on time. What can I do?
• Can I pay for an adoption with a one-off payment?
• Can I change the delivery address for my adoption pack after I’ve placed my order?
• How long will my adoption last for?
• How often will I receive updates about my adopted animal?
• What animals do you have for adoption?
• How can I find out more information about my adopted animal?
• How is my adoption money spent?
• What is your refund policy?
• An error has been made with my Direct Debit payment; can I receive a refund?
• How do I change how you contact me?
Users are free to ask any question they want. We need to evaluate which question in the FAQ is the
most similar to the user’s question, which is the objective of the quora-distilbert-base model.
There are two options in the SBERT Hub – one is for English and another for multilingual, as follows:
• quora-distilbert-base: This is fine-tuned for Quora Duplicate Questions
detection retrieval.
• quora-distilbert-multilingual: This is a multilingual version of quoradistilbert-base. It’s fine-tuned with parallel data for 50+ languages.

Semantic search with SBERT

Let’s build a semantic search model by following these steps:
1.

The following is the SBERT model’s instantiation:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
model = SentenceTransformer('quora-distilbert-base')

2.

Let’s encode the FAQ, as follows:
faq_embeddings = model.encode(wwf_faq)

3.

Let’s prepare five questions so that they are similar to the first five questions in the FAQ,
respectively; that is, our first test question should be similar to the first question in the FAQ,
the second question should be similar to the second question, and so on, so that we can easily
follow the results. Let’s define the questions in the test_questions list object and encode
them as follows:
test_questions=["What should be done, if the adoption pack did
not reach to me?",
" How fast is my adoption pack delivered to me?",
"What should I do to renew my adoption?",
"What should be done to change address and contact details ?",
"I live outside of the UK, Can I still adopt an animal?"]
test_q_emb= model.encode(test_questions)

4.

The following code measures the similarity between each test question and each question in
the FAQ and then ranks them:
from scipy.spatial.distance import cdist
for q, qe in zip(test_questions, test_q_emb):
    distances = cdist([qe], faq_embeddings, "cosine")[0]
    ind = np.argsort(distances, axis=0)[:3]
    print("\n Test Question: \n "+q)
    for i,(dis,text) in enumerate(zip(
        distances[ind],
        [wwf_faq[i] for i in ind])):
        print(dis,ind[i],text, sep="\t")

The output is as follows:

207

208

Text Representation

Figure 7.11 – Question-question similarity

Here, we can see the 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 indexes in order, which means the model successfully
found similar questions as expected.
5.

For the deployment, we can design the following getBest() function, which takes a question
and returns the K most similar questions in the FAQ:
def get_best(query, K=5):
    query_emb = model.encode([query])
    distances = cdist(query_emb,faq_embeddings,"cosine")[0]
    ind = np.argsort(distances, axis=0)
    print("\n"+query)
    for c,i in list(zip(distances[ind], ind))[:K]:
        print(c,wwf_faq[i], sep="\t")

6.

Let’s ask a question:
get_best("How do I change my contact info?",3)

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.12 – Similar question similarity results

Instruction fine-tuned embedding models

7.

What if a question that’s used as input is not similar to one from the FAQ? Here is such a question:
get_best("How do I get my plane ticket \
    if I bought it online?")

The output is as follows:

Figure 7.13 – Dissimilar question similarity results

The best dissimilarity score is 0.35. So, we need to define a threshold such as 0.3 so that the model
ignores such questions that are higher than that threshold and says no similar answers found.
Other than question-question symmetric search similarity, we can also utilize SBERT’s questionanswer asymmetric search models, such as msmarco-distilbert-base-v3, which is trained
on a dataset of around 500 K Bing search queries. It is known as Passage Ranking. This model helps
us measure how related the question and context are and checks whether the answer to the question
is in the passage.
Now, we will discuss instruction fine-tuned embeddings. These embeddings are mostly concerned
about not only embedding the text but also enabling us to use instructions as well.

Instruction fine-tuned embedding models
A single text-representation model can be trained on a specific task. For example, a model that is trained
on the semantic representation of the given text might not be a very good choice for representing
scientific texts, because the nature of similarity in this scope is different from semantic similarity.
Instruction fine-tuning is one of the approaches that has been proposed in recent years and many new
methods have adapted this approach to solve diverse sets of problems in a single model. The Instructor
model is one of these models. In this section, we will show a few examples of how this model works.
To import the model, you can either use Hugging Face transformers or the InstructEmbedding
library. Both provide the same results, but the latter is much more convenient.
To install it, simply use the pip command:
pip install InstructorEmbedding

Please note that the sentence-transformers library also must be installed:
pip install sentence-transformers

209

210

Text Representation

To load the model, you can simply follow this code:
from InstructorEmbedding import INSTRUCTOR
model = INSTRUCTOR('hkunlp/instructor-large')

This will automatically load the model, such as Hugging Face, as they used the same in the back.
They trained the model so that it follows the following instruction format:
Represent the domain text_type for task_objective:

In this format, text_type refers to the type of text (financial, scientific, etc.) while the objective is
used for various tasks, for example, clustering, semantic similarity, and so on.
For example, you can use the following format to represent medical sentences for clustering:
import sklearn.cluster
sentences = [['Represent the Medical sentence for clustering: ','COVID
has been striking all over globe from 2019.'],
    ['Represent the Medical sentence for clustering: ','The
coronavirus that causes COVID-19 is officially called SARS-CoV-2,
which stands for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.'],
    ['Represent the Medical sentence for clustering: ','The name of
the illness caused by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. COVID-19 stands for
"coronavirus disease 2019.'],
    ['Represent the Medical sentence for clustering: ',"HIV (human
immunodeficiency virus) is a virus that attacks the body's immune
system."],
    ['Represent the Medical sentence for clustering: ','If HIV is not
treated, it can lead to AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome).']]
embeddings = model.encode(sentences)
clustering_model = sklearn.cluster.MiniBatchKMeans(n_clusters=2)
clustering_model.fit(embeddings)
cluster_assignment = clustering_model.labels_
print(cluster_assignment)

As a result, you should get the following:
[0 0 0 1 1]

Also, it is possible to use it for a very different task on a very different topic such as matching questions
and answers from Wikipedia pages. This task is an information retrieval-based task in which the closest
answer to the given question must be retrieved. As an example, you can follow this code:
import numpy as np
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import cosine_similarity
query = [['Represent the Wikipedia question for retrieving supporting
documents: ','What is sea sheep?']]

Summary

corpus = [['Represent the Wikipedia document for retrieval:
','Costasiella kuroshimae—also known as a "leaf slug", "leaf sheep",
or "salty ocean caterpillar"—is a species of sacoglossan sea slug.'],
    ['Represent the Wikipedia document for retrieval: ',"Artificial
intelligence (AI) is intelligence demonstrated by machines, as opposed
to intelligence of humans and other animals."],
    ['Represent the Wikipedia document for retrieval: ','In the fields
of medicine, biotechnology and pharmacology, drug discovery is the
process by which new candidate medications are discovered.']]
query_embeddings = model.encode(query)
corpus_embeddings = model.encode(corpus)
similarities = cosine_similarity(query_embeddings,corpus_embeddings)
retrieved_doc_id = np.argmax(similarities)
print(retrieved_doc_id)

You should get the following as the result:
0

This is the first item in the corpus of answers. As you have seen from this example, embedding for
questions is done with a slightly different instruction compared to answers.
Instruction fine-tuning open a new way of solving diverse problems with a single model. This single
model has the capacity to understand and solve different problems with the given instructions rather
than being a static problem solver for a single use case.

Summary
In this chapter, we learned about text representation methods. We learned how it is possible to perform
tasks such as zero-, few-, and one-shot learning using different and diverse semantic models. We
also learned about NLI and its importance in capturing the semantics of text. Moreover, we looked
at some useful use cases such as semantic search, semantic clustering, and topic modeling using
Transformer-based semantic models. We learned how to visualize the clustering results and understood
the importance of centroids in such problems. We also described instruction-tuned multitask models
that can create representations according to the given instructions.
In the next chapter, you will learn about efficient Transformer models. You will learn about distillation,
pruning, and quantizing Transformer-based models. You will also learn about different and efficient
Transformer architectures that make improvements to computational and memory efficiency, as well
as how to use them in NLP problems.

211

212

Text Representation

Further reading
• Lewis, M., Liu, Y., Goyal, N., Ghazvininejad, M., Mohamed, A., Levy, O., Stoyanov, V., and
Zettlemoyer, L. (2019). BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language
Generation, Translation, and Comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461.
• Pushp, P. K., and Srivastava, M. M. (2017). Train Once, Test Anywhere: Zero-Shot Learning for
Text Classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05972.
• Reimers, N., and Gurevych, I. (2019). Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese
BERT-Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084.
• Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, M., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L.,
and Stoyanov, V. (2019). RoBERTa: A Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
• Williams, A., Nangia, N., and Bowman, S. R. (2017). A Broad-Coverage Challenge Corpus for
Sentence Understanding through Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05426.
• Cer, D., Yang, Y., Kong, S. Y., Hua, N., Limtiaco, N., John, R. S., Constant, N., Guajardo-Cespedes,
M., Yuan, S., Tar, C., Sung, Y., Strope, B., and Kurzweil, R. (2018). Universal Sentence Encoder.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11175.
• Yang, Y., Cer, D., Ahmad, A., Guo, M., Law, J., Constant, N., Abrego, G. H., Yuan, S., Tar C., Sung,
Y., Strope, B., and Kurzweil, R. (2019). Multilingual Universal Sentence Encoder for Semantic
Retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04307.
• Humeau, S., Shuster, K., Lachaux, M. A., and Weston, J. (2019). Poly-encoders: Transformer
Architectures and Pre-training Strategies for Fast and Accurate Multi-sentence Scoring. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.01969.
• Su, H., Shi, W., Kasai, J., Wang, Y., Hu, Y., Ostendorf, M., Yih, W., Smith, N. A., Zettlemoyer,
L., and Yu, T. (2022). One Embedder, Any Task: Instruction-Finetuned Text Embeddings.
arXiv. /abs/2212.09741

8
Boosting Model Performance
Up to this point, we have solved many tasks using common approaches and achieved some success.
However, we can increase our task performance by utilizing specific techniques. There are several
approaches to improving the performance of Transformer models in the literature. In this chapter, we will
explore some of these techniques and demonstrate how to boost the model beyond the vanilla training
pipeline, such as with data augmentation or domain adaptation. Data augmentation is a powerful
technique and is widely used for improving the accuracy of deep learning models. By augmenting
the data points, the deep learning model can capture the underlying patterns and relationships in the
data more effectively. Another method to improve model performance is domain adaptation. Since
large language models are trained on general-purpose and diverse texts, there may be a discrepancy
when applied to a specific domain. We may need to adjust these language models according to specific
application areas by incorporating many factors. Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is another
widely used technique in every subfield of deep learning for achieving optimum performance. When
training a deep learning model, certain parameters (called hyperparameters) cannot be learned
during the training process. HPO helps us find these parameters
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• Improving performance with data augmentation
• Adapting the model to the domain
• Optimizing parameters with HPO

Technical requirements
We will need the following Python libraries to be installed: nlpaug, datasets, transformers,
sacremoses, and optuna.

214

Boosting Model Performance

Improving performance with data augmentation
Data augmentation is a common technique in deep learning to improve the success of a model. It
involves replicating a data point by making changes that do not significantly alter its meaning. This
technique has been widely used in image processing and Natural Language Processing (NLP) as
training the neural model with more data typically leads to better performance.
We can introduce noise or perturbations to the existing data, create new variations or aspects of the
same data, or generate entirely new data points through interpolation, where new data is generated
based on a couple of existing nearby data points. Data augmentation is especially useful when training
data is limited. It can make the model more robust and improve its performance on downstream tasks.
There are several ways to perform data augmentation. In image processing, this may include flipping
or changing the brightness of images. In NLP, it may include removing or swapping words, injecting
random characters/words, changing the order of words in a sentence, and many advanced techniques.
The process of duplication depends entirely on creativity and the NLP task at hand. If you are working
on a classification task for linguistic acceptability, shuffling words may not be a useful augmentation. If
you are working on sentiment classification, this type of shuffling process can be practical. The critical
issue is to evaluate each augmentation technique separately to determine which techniques work and
which techniques are harmful because it is hard to know which techniques will help us without trial.
As a final remark, we can say that this process of augmentation is also widely used in the field of contrastive
learning. The contrastive learning method allows us to easily create positive and negative examples
for self-supervised learning using such augmentation. So, we can benefit from data augmentation not
only in terms of increasing the number of data but also in terms of self-supervision.
Now, let’s work on some data augmentation techniques by using the IMDb sentiment classification example.
First, let’s discuss some data augmentation techniques and use them to improve model performance.

Character-level augmentation
Only manipulations on characters fall into this category. We have the opportunity to simply augment
the data by manipulating characters. While it may not be feasible to discuss every method in detail,
let’s highlight some of the most important ones. Here are some examples:
Character-Level Augmentation

Original

Keyboard
Augmenter

Substitute character by
keyboard distance

I love cats and dogs I lobe cats and dogx

Random
Augmenter

Insert/swap/delete a
character randomly

I love cats and dogs I love cats an doggs

OCR error

Simulate OCR errors: e -> o, l -> 1

branches

Table 8.1 – Character-level data augmentation

Augmented

branchos

Improving performance with data augmentation

We can add many more methods to this category. Let’s move on to the word level.

Word-level augmentation
The word-level approach has more possibilities than the previous model. We can rely on word semantics
at this point, which gives us many techniques for augmentation. The techniques used under this
category are mostly based on a predefined list of words and are easy to apply.
Word-Level Augmentation

Original

Augmented

Spelling
Errors Dictionary

achieve

acheive

across

accross

We use a predefined
dictionary of
constantly recurring
spelling mistakes

Contextual Word
Replacing a word with Banana
Embeddings Augmenter the closest word in
Astronaut
contextual meaning to
that word using deep
learning models such as
word2vec or BERT

Apple

Synonym Replacement

Moon

Based on a
synonym dictionary

automobile

car

large

big

Antonym Replacement

Based on an
antonym dictionary

large

small

Random Word

Deletion/insertion

I love cats and dogs

I love cats and

I love cats and dogs
I love table cats
and dogs
Word Shuffling

Changing the order
of words

I love cats and dogs

love and cats dogs I

Table 8.2 – Word-level augmentation

While word-level augmentation can be useful, it does have its limitations, as word-level operations
operate independently of context and cannot take advantage of semantic information from the sentence.
That’s why we should consider using more advanced techniques based on sentence semantics, as
outlined in the next section.

215

216

Boosting Model Performance

Sentence-level augmentation
Sentence-level augmentation is a method of data augmentation that considers the entire sentence
and its meaning. As language models continue to evolve, this technique has become more and more
common. We will discuss two examples.
Back-translation is translating a text to another language (English to French, for example) and then
translating it back to the original language (French to English). Another example is translating a text
from language A to language B, then to language C, and then back to the original language in the
same way (C to B to A).
Paraphrasing is another method of semantically re-generating text, accomplished through the use of
trained checkpoints. These models take a text and generate another text that has the same meaning.
Therefore, this method is very suitable for data augmentation. However, for the two approaches, the
augmentation process takes a bit longer than previous techniques due to the inference time of the
neural model.
Here are some examples of sentence-level augmentation:
Sentence-Level Augmentation

Original

Augmented

Back-translation

Translating a text to another You have to think It takes a lot of thought
language (EN- FRA) and then a lot to understand to understand
back to the original (FRA-EN)

Paraphrasing

Using a text-to-text model

Life is the future, The future, not the past,
not the past
is where life lies

Table 8.3 – Sentence-level augmentation

Well done! We are ready to apply these techniques for any NLP task and see whether they improve
performance. We will see this in the next part.

Boosting IMDB text classification with augmentation
Now, we will improve the model performance of the IMDB sentiment task by examining some of
these augmentation methods by utilizing the nlpaug library. Please check the following link for
more information: https://github.com/makcedward/nlpaug.
This Python library helps us with augmenting textual data points for IMDB datasets (https://
huggingface.co/datasets/imdb). You can find many more data augmentation methods
in this library. We have only applied some randomly selected ones for the demonstration here but
it is important to conduct a thorough analysis to determine which set of techniques is best suited to
address your NLP task.

Improving performance with data augmentation

We start by installing the following necessary packages:
pip install nlpaug datasets transformers sacremoses

Here are the imports for augmentation:
import nlpaug.augmenter.char as nac
import nlpaug.augmenter.word as naw
import nlpaug.augmenter.sentence as nas
import nlpaug.flow as nafc
from nlpaug.util import Action

In Chapter 5, we used a small portion of the IMDb dataset for two reasons: to enable quick prototyping
and to evaluate the effect of augmentation techniques on model performance.
The following code demonstrates how we select 2,000 examples for training data:
from datasets import load_dataset
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="train[:1000]+train[-1000:]")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[:500]+test[-500:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[500:1000]+test[-1000:-500]")
imdb_train.shape, imdb_test.shape, imdb_val.shape
OUTPUT> ((2000, 2), (1000, 2), (1000, 2))

We define some necessary functions that will also be used in the examples that we will see later in
this chapter:
from sklearn.metrics import (accuracy_score,
precision_recall_fscore_support)
def compute_metrics(pred):
    labels = pred.label_ids
    preds = pred.predictions.argmax(-1)
    precision, recall, f1, _ = \
    precision_recall_fscore_support(labels,preds,
        average='macro')
    acc = accuracy_score(labels, preds)
    return {
        'Accuracy': acc,
        'F1': f1,
        'Precision': precision,
        'Recall': recall
    }

217

218

Boosting Model Performance

def tokenize_it(e):
    return tokenizer(e['text'],
        padding=True,
        truncation=True)

Now, we instantiate 10 random different augmentation objects using the nlpaug library as follows:
import nlpaug.augmenter.word as naw
#substitute character by keyboard distance
aug1 = nac.KeyboardAug(aug_word_p=0.2,
    aug_char_max=2,
    aug_word_max=4)
# random insert/swap/delete
aug2 = nac.RandomCharAug(action="insert", aug_char_max=1)
aug3 = nac.RandomCharAug(action="swap", aug_char_max=1)
aug4 = nac.RandomCharAug(action="delete", aug_char_max=1)
# spelling error
aug5 = naw.SpellingAug()
# contextual word insertion / substitute
aug6 = naw.ContextualWordEmbsAug(
    model_path='bert-base-uncased',
    action="insert")
aug7 = naw.ContextualWordEmbsAug(
    model_path='bert-base-uncased',
    action="substitute")
# wordnet-based synonym replacement
aug8 = naw.SynonymAug(aug_src='wordnet')
# random word deletion
aug9 = naw.RandomWordAug()
# back-translation
aug10 = naw.BackTranslationAug(
    from_model_name='facebook/wmt19-en-de',
    to_model_name='facebook/wmt19-de-en', device='cuda')

Now let’s write a wrapper function, augment_it(), that incorporates and applies 10 of these
techniques. The parameters are the original text to be augmented (text) and the original label
(label). We replicate the original label for each augmented text:
def augment_it(text, label):
    result= [eval("aug"+str(i)).augment(text)[0]
    for i in range(1,11) ]
    return result, [label]* len(result)

Improving performance with data augmentation

Here is an example run:
augment_it("i like cats and dogs",1)
OUTPUT:
(['i li.W cats and dogs',
'i lBike cats and zdogs',
'i liek ctas and dogs',
'i ike ats and dogs',
'in like cats and gogs',
'mostly i like my cats and dogs',
'i like this no dogs',
'i like cats and dog',
'like cats and',
'I like cats and dogs'],
[1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1])

Notice that back-translation does not produce a new sentence and returns the same sentence since
the given example is very simple for translation. For a more complex example, we can get different
returns. We also get 10 replications of label 1 returned as expected.
With the following code snippet, a random 10% sample of the IMDB dataset is being duplicated. Ten
augmented sentences will be generated for each selected example. Then, the input dataset will double
in size. Since this code snippet uses BERT-like models, the generation process will be a bit slow.
We can observe the effect on performance by tweaking the degree of augmentation (frac-> [0.1
- 1.0]) using up to the entire dataset or increasing the number of augmentation techniques:
import pandas as pd
imdb_df=pd.DataFrame(imdb_train)
texts=[]
labels=[]
for r in imdb_df.sample(frac=0.1).itertuples(index=False):
    t,l=augment_it(r.text, r.label)
    texts+= t
    labels+=l
aug_df=pd.DataFrame()
aug_df["text"]= texts
aug_df["label"]= labels
imdb_augmented=pd.concat([imdb_df, aug_df])
imdb_df.shape, imdb_augmented.shape
OUTPUT: ((2000, 2), (4000, 2))

We doubled the data size (2K to 4K) and obtained imdb_augmented.

219

220

Boosting Model Performance

The following code contains two datasets: one normal dataset (imdb_train) and one augmented
dataset (imdb_augmented). The normal dataset is currently selected, and the augmented dataset
is commented out. When running the code a second time, you should swap them (selecting the
imdb_augmented dataset by commenting out the normal dataset):
from transformers import (
    BertTokenizerFast, BertForSequenceClassification)
model_path= 'bert-base-uncased'
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(model_path)
#imdb train data with augmentation
#imdb_augmented2= Dataset.from_pandas(imdb_augmented)
#enc_train=imdb_augmented2.map(tokenize_it,
#batched=True, batch_size=1000)
# imdb train data without augmentation
enc_train=imdb_train.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_test=imdb_test.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_val=imdb_val.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
model_path= "bert-base-uncased"
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    model_path,
    id2label={0:"NEG", 1:"POS"},
    label2id={"NEG":0, "POS":1})

With this code, we fine-tune the bert-base-uncased model. The following code snippet is exactly
the same as the one I applied in Chapter 5:
from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='./MyIMDBModel',
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
    fp16=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True)
trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=enc_train,
    eval_dataset=enc_val,

Adapting the model to the domain

    compute_metrics= compute_metrics)
trainer.train()
q=[trainer.evaluate(eval_dataset=data) \
    for data in [enc_train, enc_val, enc_test]]
pd.DataFrame(q, index=["train","val","test"]).iloc[:,:5]

Without augmentation, we get the following output:

Figure 8.1 – The performance of the IMDB dataset without data augmentation

With augmentation, we get the following results:

Figure 8.2 – The performance of the IMDB dataset with data augmentation

As we can see, the eval_F1 score has increased from 86.8 to 88.6 (+1.8). Additionally, there appears
to be an improvement in other parameters. To improve performance, we can scale up augmentation
techniques and conduct a detailed analysis of different augmentation approaches for selection.
Well done! We will try another technique to improve the model performance with domain adaption
in the next section!

Adapting the model to the domain
Although the fine-tuning approach for Transformer architectures usually performs well, differences
in the distribution of source and target data can have a significant impact on the effectiveness of finetuning (Transfer Learning in Natural Language Processing, Ruder et al., NAACL 2019). If the source
and target datasets are substantially different, fine-tuning may struggle to learn without adaptation.
Previous studies have shown that pretrained Transformers are the most robust architectures for
handling word distribution shifts and have greater generalization capacity than other architectures
(Yildirim, Savas, et al. Adaptive Fine-tuning for Multiclass Classification over Software Requirement
Data, arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.00495 (2023).). However, there is still room for improvement (Don’t

221

222

Boosting Model Performance

Stop Pretraining: Adapt Language Models to Domains and Tasks, Gururangan et al., ACL 2020), using
additional in-domain data. By specializing the model to the target data, we expect to improve its
performance on downstream tasks. That is, a pretrained model is further trained using the pretraining
objective on target data that is expected to be closer to the target distribution. Finally, we will have
another version of the pretrained model (adapted-bert, for instance), which still requires finetuning for a downstream task. The following diagram summarizes our adaptive fine-tuning framework:

Figure 8.3 – Domain-adaptive fine-tuning

As shown at the bottom of the diagram, adaptive fine-tuning consists of three phases. The objective
function is typically the masked language model (MLM). For the first step, there are already many
pretrained checkpoints available in the literature, such as bert-base-uncased and robertalarge. Therefore, we do not need to pretrain a model from scratch. These pretrained models have
already been trained on a large variety of data and have a sufficient depth of syntactic and semantic
knowledge encoded in their parameters, as discussed in Chapters 3 to 5.
In the second phase, a pretrained model trains with the same source objective MLM but with the target
(in-domain) unsupervised datasets for adaptation. It is important to note that other kinds of auxiliary
objective functions can be utilized to improve adaptation. During this phase, we do not change the
objective of the vanilla BERT model architecture (MLM) and do not add any additional parameters.
After this process, we will have an adapted checkpoint to be ready for fine-tuning any downstream
tasks, as described in Chapter 5.

Adapting the model to the domain

Let’s adapt the BERT model with domain data and then fine-tune it. We will use the same IMDB
dataset. We define model_path and load the tokenizer first, as follows:
from transformers import (BertTokenizerFast,
BertForSequenceClassification)
model_path= 'bert-base-uncased'
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(model_path)

The following code loads a dataset consisting of 4K training, 1K validation, and 1K test. You can scale
it up to the entire dataset if you like:
from datasets import load_dataset
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="train[:2000]+train[-2000:]")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[:500]+test[-500:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[500:1000]+test[-1000:-500]")
imdb_train.shape, imdb_test.shape, imdb_val.shape
OUTPUT:
((4000, 2), (1000, 2), (1000, 2))

And we tokenize and encode them to prepare our dataset for training as follows:
def tokenize_it(e):
    return tokenizer(e['text'],
    padding=True,
    truncation=True)
enc_train=imdb_train.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_test=imdb_test.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_val=imdb_val.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)

At this point, we will adapt the bert-base-uncased model with all raw texts in our available
training dataset. No supervised method will be used here. You can use all the raw text data in your
domain at this stage. Therefore, only the text part of the IMDB training data will be used. Data size is
important for good adaptation; therefore, we will take all the training data and perform adaptation.
Let’s load the entire training data as follows:
dataset_for_adaptation= load_dataset('imdb', split="train")
imdb_sentences=dataset_for_adaptation["text"]
train_sentences=imdb_sentences[:20000]
dev_sentences=imdb_sentences[20000:]

223

224

Boosting Model Performance

Then, load the model:
from transformers import AutoModelForMaskedLM, AutoTokenizer
model = AutoModelForMaskedLM.from_pretrained(model_path)

Some hyperparameters for the adaptation phase are as follows:
batch_size = 16
num_train_epochs = 15
max_length = 100
mlm_prob = 0.25

Here, we keep the epoch number longer than the normal fine-tuning process. On the other hand,
the original MLM rate value of BERT is 0.15. The MLM rate is a value indicating the percentage
of input tokens to be masked. In some studies, it has been shown that this value is more efficient if
it is between 15 and 40 percent. As the number of masked tokens increases, the model can extract
stronger representations to capture the meaning. In parallel, it will be necessary to keep the step or
epoch values longer. Therefore, it will be beneficial to apply trial-and-error methods or HPO, which
we will see in the next section. In this study, we will keep the MLM value at 0.25. You can increase
the maximum length value and batch value depending on your GPU capacity.
We borrow the TokenizedSentencesDataset class definition from the SBERT GitHub repository.
You can also find command-line script code there to directly run the Python code without diving into
the Jupyter code block (https://www.sbert.net/examples/unsupervised_learning/
MLM/README.html).
We can see the dataset class definition in the following code:
class TokenizedSentencesDataset:
    def __init__(self, sentences, tokenizer,
        max_length, cache_tokenization=False):
        self.tokenizer = tokenizer
        self.sentences = sentences
        self.max_length = max_length
        self.cache_tokenization = cache_tokenization
    def __getitem__(self, item):
        if not self.cache_tokenization:
            return self.tokenizer(self.sentences[item],
                add_special_tokens=True,
                truncation=True,
                max_length=self.max_length,
                return_special_tokens_mask=True)

Adapting the model to the domain

        if isinstance(self.sentences[item], str):
            self.sentences[item] =\
                self.tokenizer(self.sentences[item],
                add_special_tokens=True,
                truncation=True,
                max_length=self.max_length,
                return_special_tokens_mask=True)
        return self.sentences[item]
    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.sentences)

Let’s tokenize our dataset for adaptation as follows:
train_dataset = TokenizedSentencesDataset(train_sentences,
    tokenizer, max_length)
dev_dataset = TokenizedSentencesDataset(dev_sentences,
    tokenizer, max_length)

Now, we use the Trainer class to prepare the running environment. We pass mlm_prob = 0.25
to the DataCollator object as follows:
data_collator = \
    DataCollatorForLanguageModeling(tokenizer=tokenizer,
    mlm=True,
    mlm_probability=mlm_prob)
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    num_train_epochs=num_train_epochs,
    evaluation_strategy="steps",
    per_device_train_batch_size=batch_size,
    prediction_loss_only=True,
    fp16=True)
trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    data_collator=data_collator,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=dev_dataset)

Let’s run the adaptation:
trainer.train()

Now, we can see the output of the training process as follows:

225

226

Boosting Model Performance

Figure 8.4 – Domain adaptation training with MLM (truncated output)

We can see only 3 training epochs and validation loss in the preceding figure, but you will see 15
epochs for your run. It can take a long time depending on your GPU capacity and dataset.
Well done! We will save our adapted model to be used later, as follows:
adapted_model_path="adapted-bert"
model.save_pretrained(adapted_model_path)
tokenizer.save_pretrained(adapted_model_path)

Now, we have two checkpoints, as follows:
• bert-base-uncased # (vanilla bert)
• adapted-bert # (adapted bert)
In the following code, we comment out vanilla bert and first fine-tune adapted-bert and
then the vanilla bert checkpoints by swapping commenting:
model_path="adapted-bert" # 1) Adapted model
#model_path= "bert-base-uncased" # 2)vanilla bert
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    model_path,
    id2label={0:"NEG", 1:"POS"},
    label2id={"NEG":0, "POS":1})

In the following step, we create a TrainingArguments and Trainer object in the same way
as we did in the Improving performance with data augmentation section. Let’s show the code of the
fine-tuning phase in a truncated way:
training_args = TrainingArguments(...
trainer = Trainer(…
trainer.train()

Adapting the model to the domain

Let’s compare the vanilla bert and adapted-bert fine-tuning performance as follows. The
following output is vanilla fine-tuning:

Figure 8.5 – Vanilla BERT performance on the IMDB dataset

The following is the output of adapted training:

Figure 8.6 – Adapted BERT performance on the IMDB dataset

As seen in the figures, the adapted model is slightly better than the bert-base (vanilla) model in
all metrics. We addressed the issue of adaptation in a straightforward manner. There are various ways,
of course, to enhance the adaptation process.
Now, let’s list some observations and tips about adaptive learning that you can benefit from:
• One point to be aware of is catastrophic forgetting, which can result in the loss of a significant
amount of information in the trained model weights. Therefore, if you encounter such a
situation, it may be beneficial to keep the learning rate value lower and carefully monitor the
validation loss value. Failure to pay attention to these factors can hinder the improvement we
are now targeting.
• Currently, our transfer learning strategy has a sequential feature. Therefore, we can add this
training step to the pipeline as often as we want.
• We already performed unsupervised domain-adaptive training by using domain-specific texts.
Then, we conducted task-adaptive training with a specific task objective. You can add some
tasks similar to your task before your last fine-tuning. Let’s say we want to solve a particular
Question Answering (QA) problem in the medical domain. We have common datasets such
as PudMed raw text, Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SquAD)-like doctor-patient
conversations and our own QA task in medicine. We first adapt the model with the unsupervised
PudMed dataset, then train it with the supervised doctor-patient dataset, and finally, train our
QA task. These types of sequential training (domain-adaptive and task-adaptive) increase the
success of the model performance.

227

228

Boosting Model Performance

• As another example, let’s say we want to solve a sequence labeling task such as detecting sensitive
information (ID, bank information, etc.) in a text. There are already many checkpoints trained
for Named Entity Recognition (NER) tasks as popular sequence labeling tasks. We can directly
use those already-trained NER checkpoints instead of bert-base. This will be an important
advantage provided by the sequential transfer learning method.
In the previous sections, we mostly chose the default parameters. In the next section, we’ll explore
whether we can use a more efficient selection strategy.

Optimizing the parameters with HPO
Hyperparameters are the only parameters that deep learning models cannot learn during training.
So, we need to follow a way to specify them. The first way is usually to follow common practices in
the literature. For example, the typical epoch value for fine-tuning a BERT model is around 3. One
strategy can be manually adjusting these parameters while monitoring model performance – in
particular, monitoring validation loss.
Furthermore, it is possible to systematically determine the optimal set of parameters using certain
algorithms. One approach to achieve this is to explore all possibilities by searching over a predefined
set of hyperparameters, a naive process known as grid search. However, a grid search-like model is not
always practical and can be tedious since training a single Transformer model is a lengthy procedure.
Alternatively, a random search can be preferred. It achieves similar results with specific randomization
while reducing the complexity of grid search. This approach randomly samples the search space and
continues until the stopping criteria are met.
There are many modern algorithms for HPO such as grid search, Bayesian optimization, and
particle swarm optimization. One such algorithm is the Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE)
approach, which is a Bayesian optimization algorithm that uses a probabilistic model to evaluate the
performance of different hyperparameters. Specifically, it sequentially constructs models based on
historical measurements, and then subsequently chooses new hyperparameters. For details, please see
the following paper: Bergstra, James, et al., Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization, Advances in
neural information processing systems 24 (2011).
Now, we will implement HPO using the Optuna framework (https://github.com/pfnet/
optuna/). Optuna is a framework designed for HPO that contains various optimization approaches.
We will use the TPE algorithm, which is the default option.
We start by installing the necessary packages:
pip install datasets transformers optuna

Optimizing the parameters with HPO

Loading the same IMDB dataset, we take 2K for training, 1K for testing, and 1K for validation, as follows:
from datasets import load_dataset
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="train[:1000]+train[-1000:]")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[:500]+test[-500:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[500:1000]+test[-1000:-500]")
imdb_train.shape, imdb_test.shape, imdb_val.shape

The following functions are from the previous sections (Improving performance with data augmentation
and Adapting the model to the domain) in this chapter:
def compute_metrics(pred):
def tokenize_it(e):

As we have optimized the bert-base-uncased model, we tokenize the dataset according to it.
We are already familiar with the following code:
from transformers import (BertTokenizerFast,
        BertForSequenceClassification)
model_path= 'bert-base-uncased'
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(model_path)
enc_train=imdb_train.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_test=imdb_test.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_val=imdb_val.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)

We can optimize many hyperparameters. The most important hyperparameters for transformers are
as follows:
•

Learning rate

• The number of epochs
• Batch size
• Optimization algorithm
• Scheduler type
For the sake of simplicity, we will only take the learning rate value and batch size as example parameters
to demonstrate an HPO application.

229

230

Boosting Model Performance

We will use a trial object to create our hyperparameter sampling. We can utilize the following
Optuna features:
• Categorical: optuna.trial.Trial.suggest_categorical()
• Integer: optuna.trial.Trial.suggest_int()
• Floating point: optuna.trial.Trial.suggest_float()
We will search learning-rate in the range [1e-6 – 1e-4] from the log domain, which means
the possible values are 1e-6, 1e-5, and 1e-4. If the log value selected is false (default), as it is
searched in the linear domain, you will need to specify a step for discretization. For batch_size,
we provide a categorical list rather than a range, as follows:
def hp_space(trial):
    hp={"learning_rate":
        trial.suggest_float("learning_rate",
            1e-6, 1e-4,
            log=True),
    "per_device_train_batch_size":
        trial.suggest_categorical(
        "per_device_train_batch_size",
        [8, 16]),
    }
    return hp

At the end of the code, the returning object, hp, is a type of dictionary for search space. Our Trainer
object will use it for the optimization.
From now on, the following code snippets will be exactly the same as in the previous sections (Improving
performance with data augmentation and Adapting the model to the domain):
training_args = TrainingArgument(...
trainer = Trainer(...

We will only run the trainer call differently. Instead of calling trainer.train(), we call
trainer.hyperparameter_search(), as follows:
best_run= trainer.hyperparameter_search(
    direction="maximize",
    hp_space=hp_space)

With the direction parameter, we target to maximize the compute_metric() function. When
you run the following code, you will see that a fine-tuning process is repeated several times. In the
end, Optuna will give us the optimized parameters. When you repeat the experiment by adding more

Optimizing the parameters with HPO

parameters to be optimized and increasing the search space, the entire process will take a bit longer.
Let’s see what Optuna optimizes by checking best_run as follows:
best_run
BestRun(run_id='11', objective=3.63,
    hyperparameters={
        'learning_rate': 2.25e-05,
        'per_device_train_batch_size': 16})

The optimized learning rate and the batch size are 2.25e-05 and 16, respectively. Recall that we
had selected the default value for the learning rate, which is 5e-5, and the batch size of 16 in another
experiment. Let’s compare them in terms of task performance. When we train the model with the
default parameters and optimized one, we will get the following performance tables.
Without HPO and taking lr as 5e-05 by default, we obtain the following output:

Figure 8.7 – Normal BERT fine-tuning

With HPO and taking lr as 2.25e-05, we get the following output:

Figure 8.8 – BERT fine-tuning with HPO

When we look at the test data results, the experiment conducted with HPO is slightly better than
vanilla training with a very small difference. All values are slightly better at the level of 0.2 (90.09 F1
to 90.28). The difference is very small and needs to be statistically tested. For example, McNemar’s
test, t-test, or 5×2 cross-validation can be utilized to compare two machine learning models. However,
we kept our HPO experiment very minimal. If we work in a little more detail, we can achieve better
results in terms of statistical significance.
Well done! So far, we have tried to improve our models from three different approaches and have
been successful in all three. We kept our experiments as simple as possible, but let’s not forget that it
would be beneficial to work more comprehensively. It would be useful to test and analyze different
techniques for data augmentation, improve the quality of data in domain adaptation, experiment with
various checkpoints, and expand the search space for HPO.

231

232

Boosting Model Performance

Summary
In this chapter, we have examined techniques to improve model performance. Our focus has been on
data augmentation, domain adaptation, and HPO, all of which contribute to an improvement in our
classification task. However, we are not limited to these methods alone. There are several approaches
to improving model performance that can be found in the literature. In this chapter, we have only
covered the most common ones. We have updated entire model parameters when fine-tuning so far.
In the upcoming chapter, we will discuss how to enhance the parameter efficiency of model fine-tuning
with special parameter-efficient techniques to reduce time complexity.

9
Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning
Fine-tuning has become a prevalent modeling paradigm in AI, particularly in transfer learning.
All of the experiments in this book up to this chapter have been based on updating all parameters.
Therefore, it is more accurate to use the term full fine-tuning from now on (also called full model
fine-tuning or full parameter fine-tuning).
In this chapter, we will look at partial fine-tuning strategies. As we consider the continuously increasing
parameters of large language models (LLMs), fine-tuning and the inference of LLMs become
prohibitively expensive. Full fine-tuning requires a complete update of all parameters, saving large
models separately for each task. Unfortunately, this process is computationally expensive in terms
of both memory and running time. For example, Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT) has 300 million parameters, T5 has up to 11 billion, GPT has 175 billion,
Pathways Language Model (PaLM) has 540 billion parameters, and so forth. Therefore, we need to
think much more about Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT).
In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:
• What is PEFT?
• Hands-on PEFT experiments

Technical requirements
We will need the following packages:
• adapter-transformers==3.2.1
• transformers==4.29.0
• peft==0.3.0
• datasets==2.12.0

234

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

Introduction to PEFT
Before we start, let’s ask ourselves the following question: In the era of ChatGPT, we know that LLMs
can solve many problems without the need for any additional updates or fine-tuning operations; so,
do we still need fine-tuning operations?
Yes! We currently use models such as ChatGPT to efficiently solve general problems such as sentiment
analysis, named-entity recognition (NER), and summarization. However, our industry or academia
requires very specific natural language processing (NLP) tasks that are influenced by factors such as
culture, domain, time, and geography. Studies (see Is ChatGPT a General-Purpose Natural Language
Processing Task Solver?, Chengwei Qin et al.) have shown that fine-tuning a model outperforms
ChatGPT-like language models. Therefore, it is better to fine-tune the model.
Additionally, it is possible to use relatively smaller models such as BERT or T5 by fine-tuning them
for on-premises use within the company. This approach mitigates the risk of information security
breaches. In summary, for now, it is necessary to use fine-tuning to meet our NLP needs.
The advantages of PEFT can be summarized as follows:
• When dealing with multiple tasks, it is essential to use PEFT methods. Full fine-tuning produces
distinct fine-tuned model parameters for each task, which can be costly when serving models
that handle numerous tasks. PEFT makes it easy to switch tasks in deployment.
• Parameter-efficient tuning allows for quick adaptation to new tasks without catastrophic
forgetting, in addition to parameter savings. Since we only update the task-related parameters
without modifying the parameters of the main model, the main models do not undergo
considerable forgetting.
• PEFT methods provide us with the chance to manage complicated procedures such as
hyperparameter optimization when it comes to time and memory complexity. Even with
high-performance hardware, performing full fine-tuning is not feasible in resource-intensive
applications such as HPO.
• Multi-task learning can be applied more easily using PEFT methods. Frameworks such as
AdapterFusion leverage the knowledge from multiple source tasks to enhance performance
on a target task.
In this chapter, we address PEFT methods, run a couple of experiments, and see the difference in
terms of model performance and training efficiency. We also address the problem of whether we can
achieve the same performance as full fine-tuning by training some of the parameters or other efficient
fine-tuning methods. Let us first discuss PEFT approaches.

Understanding Types of PEFT

Understanding Types of PEFT
Several approaches have been developed to democratize LLMs during inference and fine-tuning. Some
approaches other than partial fine-tuning are quantizations such as int8, distillation, and sparsification.
These approaches reduce memory requirements for inference and fine-tuning. Recently, we have seen
a great effort in the modification of models. these efforts, which are called PEFT, aim to keep the
number of parameters updated as low as possible while maintaining comparable performance with
full training. Although some PEFT studies have shown better results than full fine-tuning, it has been
found that these successes can be sensitive to hyperparameters.
There are various PEFT approaches in the literature such as adapters, prompt-tuning, prefix-tuning,
(IA)3, BitFit, and Low-rank Adaptation of Large Language Models (LoRA) to name a few. These
approaches have been classified into three main categories in a survey (see Scaling Down to Scale Up:
A Guide to Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning, Vladislav Lialin, Vijeta Deshpande, and Anna Rumshisky):
• Additive methods:
• Selective methods
• Low-rank fine-tuning:

Additive methods
Additive methods add new task-specific neural weights (parameters) to transformers. The weights
of the original model are kept frozen and just shared between tasks. Only these added weights are
trained during the fine-tuning stage, which leads to < %1 parameter efficiency, which also supports
multi-task learning. To reduce the parameters to be updated, bottleneck architecture can be applied
in this model family, projecting the original dimension to a lower degree and mapping back to the
original again. As the added weights can be shared specifically for tasks, it is an easy-to-use method.
adapter-transformers is a powerful library for this purpose. We will use it for hands-on study.
Adapters can be roughly classified as serial and parallel. Serial adapters are the adapter layers added
in a sequential manner. Adapter tuning (described in the paper Parameter-efficient transfer learning
for NLP, Neil Houlsby et al., International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR) tuning (described
in Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation, Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang) and
prompt-tuning (described in The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning, Brian Lester,
Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant) attach additional tokens to input on the hidden layer of the model
in a parallel manner. While prefix-tuning appends a learnable vector to the attention head at each
transformer layer, prompt-tuning appends this vector only to the input embedding. Prefix-tuning and
prompt-tuning utilize soft-prompting, which means a trainable continuous prompt is added instead
of adding a discrete word or token as we do during the prompt engineering phase. With training, we
expect the model to estimate the embedding of this soft (or continuous) prompt. The disadvantage
of such affixes (prefix, infix, and suffix) reduce the model’s usable sequence length.

235

236

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

Selective methods
Approaches in this family do not add a new parameter to language models and update only the
selected parameter based on certain methods. Bias-only, BitFit, for instance, trains only bias terms
on the network while freezing all other parameters. Sparse fine-tuning methods, such as FISH Mask,
select some parameters of the model based on a formula such as Fisher information in FISH Mask.
SparseAdapter applies the sparsification method to added adapters instead of the main model. Thus,
it is considered both a selective and additive method.

Low-rank fine-tuning
The low-rank structure is very common in the AI field. Many tasks have a certain low-rank structure,
which helps to perform various computations rapidly in a low-rank subspace. The most important
PEFT method of this family is LoRA (see LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models,
Edward J. Hu, et al.). It performs low-rank fine-tuning by training trainable pairs of rank decomposition
matrices for Wq (query) and Wv (value) matrices in the self-attention mechanism. All pretrained model
parameters are kept frozen, and only these two Wq (query) and Wv (value) matrices are left trainable
with reparameterization. LoRA decomposes them into a product of two low-rank matrices.
This reparameterization process reduces the number of trainable parameters significantly due to its
selective and low-rank nature, while also achieving performance levels comparable to full training.
The main motivation for this approach is the latency problem for additive adapter models. Adapterbased models raise inference latency problems as they have to process sequentially and LLM relies
on hardware parallelism. Since the adapter layer must be computed in addition to the base model,
this inevitably introduces additional latency. These serial adapter models are suitable for model finetuning, especially on a single GPU.
The authors of AdaLoRA (see Adaptive Budget Allocation for Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning, Qingru
Zhang et al.) proposed a variant of LoRA to enhance the LoRA approach in two ways. Firstly, AdaLoRA
fine-tunes LLM by attributing different importance to matrices and pruning redundant singular values.
This approach underlines that weight matrices have varying levels of importance across different
modules and layers when fine-tuning pretrained models. Secondly, while LoRA applies SVD (Singular
Value Decomposition) to query and value projections only, AdaLoRA applies it to all weight matrices
to improve its performance.
Now, it is time to get our hands dirty with some experiments. We will do this in the next section.

Hands-on PEFT experiments
In this section, you may encounter some problems or errors when using the CPU. We suggest you
use GPU for training. We will solve two different classification problems using PEFT. Throughout
the book, we have mentioned the sentiment analysis problem several times. Now, to diversify our
experiments, let’s also include the NLI (Natural Language Inference) problem.

Hands-on PEFT experiments

We will conduct two experiments as follows:
• Efficiently fine-tuning the BERT model for an IMDb sentiment dataset with adaptertransformers
• Efficiently fine-tune FLAN-T5 for an NLI task with the LoRA framework

Fine-tuning a BERT checkpoint with adapter tuning
For the first problem, we will specifically address the IMDb sentiment task that we already fine-tuned
with full fine-tuning methods before. This way, we will have the opportunity to compare:
1.

Start with installing the necessary packages as follows:
!pip install datasets==2.12.0 adapter-transformers==3.2.1

As you can see, we do not install HF’s transformers packages since adaptertransformers is used as a drop-in replacement for HF’s transformers library.
2.

Now, we will import the necessary modules:
import torch, os
from torch import cuda
import numpy as np
from transformers import AdapterTrainer
from transformers import (BertTokenizerFast,
    BertForSequenceClassification Trainer)

3.

TrainingArgumentsfrom datasets import load_dataset. We will fine-tune a bertbase-uncased model:
model_path= 'bert-base-uncased'
tokenizer =BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(model_path)

4.

As in the previous hands-on experiment, we load smaller portions from the IMDb dataset: 4K
for training, 1K for testing, and 1K for validation:
imdb_train= load_dataset('imdb',
   split="train[:2000]+train[-2000:]")
imdb_test= load_dataset('imdb',
   split="test[:500]+test[-500:]")
imdb_val= load_dataset('imdb',
    split="test[500:1000]+test[-1000:-500]")

5.

We define tokenize_it() function to encode the datasets as follows:
def tokenize_it(e):
    return tokenizer(e['text'],

237

238

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

        padding=True,
        truncation=True)
enc_train=imdb_train.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_test=imdb_test.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)
enc_val=imdb_val.map(tokenize_it,
    batched=True, batch_size=1000)

Training argument initialization will be the same as in the previous vanilla training. The only
different hyperparameter is learning_rate set as 2e-4. Recall that in our other vanilla
fine-tuning process, we mostly tended to select a lower learning_rate of around 2e-5.
Selecting higher learning_rate values can be risky for full fine-tuning as we update entire
parameters, which leads to catastrophic forgetting. But now, we are safe as we only update
some added parameters and do not touch the entire BERT model. So, you can select a higher
learning_rate if you want.
6.

We define the training arguments as follows:
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    "/tmp",
    do_train=True,
    do_eval=True,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    learning_rate=2e-4,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=16,
    evaluation_strategy="epoch",
    save_strategy="epoch",
    fp16=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True
    )

7.

We will now define the metrics that we want to monitor during training in the compute()
function. For now, let’s keep it simple and monitor the Accuracy metric only:
def compute_acc(p):
    preds = np.argmax(p.predictions, axis=1)
    acc={"Accuracy": (preds == p.label_ids).mean()}
    return acc

8.

We load the bert-base-uncased checkpoint as follows:
from transformers import BertModelWithHeads
model = BertModelWithHeads.from_pretrained(model_path)

Hands-on PEFT experiments

9.

Now, we will define an adapter named "imdb_sentiment". Thus, we will freeze all other
original parameters in modeling and only allow the update of the added parameters:
model.add_adapter("imdb_sentiment")

10. We will add a trainable classification head and associate it with an added adapter, namely
imdb_sentiment. For this head, we will also specify how many classes it will have:
model.add_classification_head("imdb_sentiment",num_labels=2)

11. Now, we inform the training process that the added adapter will be trained as in the following code:
model.train_adapter("imdb_sentiment")

We do this because, in some cases, we may not want to train the added parameters. We may
especially need this during the multi-task learning phase.
Let us see the parameter efficiency as follows:
trainable_params=model\
    .num_parameters(only_trainable=True)/(2**20)
all_params=model.num_parameters() /2**20
print(f"{all_params=:.2f} M\n"+
f"{trainable_params=:.2f} M\n"+
f"The efficiency ratio is \
    {100*trainable_params/all_params:.2f}%")

The output is as follows:
all_params=105.83 M
trainable_params=1.42 M
the efficiency ratio = 1.34%

As you can see, we have a parameter gain of about 1.34%.
12. We define AdapterTrainer instead of HF’s vanilla Trainer class. The following code
triggers the training process:
trainer = AdapterTrainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=enc_train,
    eval_dataset=enc_val,
    compute_metrics=compute_acc)
trainer.train()

239

240

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

The output of the training is as follows:

Figure 9.1 – Training with adapter-transformers

13. As we can see, we fine-tune the model in 1.34 minutes for 3 epochs. Keep them in mind. Let’s
look at the overall accuracy performance:
import pandas as pd
q=[trainer.evaluate(eval_dataset=data) for data in\
    [enc_train, enc_val, enc_test]]
pd.DataFrame(q, index=["train","val","test"]).iloc[:,:5]

The output of the execution is as follows:

Figure 9.2 – Performance with adapter-transformers

Well, our test accuracy performance is about 0.912.
The results suggest that the model has been fine-tuned quickly and successfully. But is it really fast
and successful? We need to look at the results of experiments with vanilla fine-tuning. We have
already conducted this IMDb experiment identically in Chapter 8. Let’s just recall the results of this
experiment. The following screenshot shows the outputs generated by the vanilla fine-tuning process
for three epochs:

Figure 9.3 – Training with vanilla Transformers (without adapters)

Hands-on PEFT experiments

With vanilla full fine-tuning, the training process takes 8.15 minutes while the fine-tuning of the model
takes 1.34 minutes. As we can see, the accuracy performances are comparable. So, we can safely say
that PEFT fine-tuning is really fast and successful!

Efficiently fine-tune FLAN-T5 for an NLI task with Lora
NLI involves determining whether a given hypothesis is true (entailment), false (contradiction), or
undetermined (neutral) given a corresponding premise.
We will use the SNLI project for the task. The SNLI project (https://nlp.stanford.edu/
projects/snli/) is a collection of 570,000 sentence pairs annotated with the labels contradiction,
entailment, and neutral.
An example for each category is as follows:
premise

hypothesis

label

A man inspects the uniform of a
figure in a country.

The man is sleeping.

Contradiction

An older and younger man smiling.

Two men are smiling and laughing at the Neutral
cats playing on the floor.

A soccer game with multiple
males playing.

Some men are playing a sport.

Entailment

Table 9.1 – Three examples from the Original SNLI dataset

As seen in the preceding table, we are given premise and hypothesis and the task is to map
the sentence pair to a proper category. We will efficiently train the FLAN-T5 model for this purpose
starting with installing the necessary libraries:
1.

We start by installing the necessary Python modules:
!pip install transformers==4.29.0 peft==0.3.0 datasets==2.12.0

2.

Let us import the modules:
from transformers import AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM, AutoTokenizer
from transformers import (default_data_collator,
get_linear_schedule_with_warmup)
from peft import (get_peft_config, get_peft_model,
    get_peft_model_state_dict,LoraConfig, TaskType)
import torch, os
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
from tqdm import tqdm
import pandas as pd

241

242

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

from datasets import (load_dataset,
    Dataset, DatasetDict)

3.

There are 570K examples in the SNLI dataset. We will work with a 1% sample for faster
prototyping. The same code can be used for the entire dataset later.
dataset = load_dataset("snli")
snli_sampled=pd.DataFrame(dataset["train"])
snli_sampled=snli_sampled.sample(frac=0.01)

4.

We will see label distribution of the sampled SNLI dataset as follows:
snli_sampled.label.value_counts()

The output is as follows:
2 1870
1 1825
0 1798
-1 9
Name: label, dtype: int64

5.

Eliminate unlabeled instances (with the -1 label):
snli_sampled= snli_sampled[snli_sampled.label>-1]

6.

The label names are as follows:
names=dataset["train"].features["label"].names
Names
Output: ['entailment', 'neutral', 'contradiction']

7.

We will need a dictionary of id2label:
mapp=dict(enumerate(names))
mapp
OUTPUT:   {0: 'entailment',
1: 'neutral',
2: 'contradiction'}

The dataset is ready. However, the current dataset format is suitable for text classification.
We could fine-tune a BERT model for the task, but in this experiment, we will treat the task
differently and fine-tune a text-to-text model, flan-t5, by rephrasing instances. We already
introduced flan-t5 as a generative model in Chapter 4. FLAN Framework (https://
github.com/google-research/FLAN) was able to model 1,800 different instruction
fine-tuning tasks simultaneously without changing the model architecture. The framework
explored the T5 model’s capacity for improving the ability of language models at scale to
perform zero-shot tasks based purely on instructions.

Hands-on PEFT experiments

As FLAN-T5 is a text-to-text model, we need to convert our current NLP task (text1,
text2-> label) into a text-to-text instruction format (text-in->text-out) by
rephrasing it. Therefore, we need to cast both the input and output as text using a template.
For this, we will use the following prompt method. You can improve this prompt method with
more interesting and alternative expressions and repeat the experiment.
8.

Let’s run the following rephrasing code and examine the new form of the data:
snli_sampled_df= pd.DataFrame(snli_sampled)
snli_sampled_df["text"]= snli_sampled_df\
    .apply(lambda x: "S1:" +x.premise
    +"S2:"+x.hypothesis+
    ". The relation between S1 and S2 is labeled "+
    "as entailment, neutral or contradiction ?",
axis=1)
snli_sampled_df["label"]=snli_sampled_df\
    .apply(lambda x: f"It is {mapp[x.label]}",
    axis=1)

The output looks like the following:

Figure 9.4 – Rephrasing the task as task-instruction of SNLI dataset

9.

Now, we have two new text and label String where text includes a rephrased form of
premise and hypothesis. Likewise, label is a rephrased form of the original label (1->
"it is neutral"). Let us examine the last resulting text as follows:
S1:Three men in uniform walk around town. S2:Three men rob
the residents. The relation between S1 and S2 is labeled as
entailment, neutral or contradiction ?.

The text field has both premise and hypothesis. We named them S1 and S2 in
order, but we could have named their original names, premise and hypothesis. You
can try it differently. We also inject a question (e.g., The relation between S1 and
S2 I... ?) to direct the T5 model to the targeted output. To direct the model’s output to
desired selections, we provided hints (… is labeled as entailment, neutral,

243

244

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

or contradiction ?) for potential tags that might be outputted by the model because
generative language models are prone to producing random words or hallucinations. We try
to narrow down the output space.
10. We divide the dataset into two parts: training (70%) and validation (30%) and store them in
the snli_sampled_dict dictionary object as follows:
CUT=snli_sampled_df.shape[0]*7//10
print(f"Training set size is {CUT}")
print(f"Validation set size is \
{snli_sampled_df.shape[0]-CUT}")
print(f"Total size is {snli_sampled_df.shape[0]}")
snli_sampled_dict= DatasetDict({
    "train":
    Dataset.from_pandas(snli_sampled_df[:CUT])
    "validation":
    Dataset.from_pandas(snli_sampled_df[CUT:])
    })

The output is as follows:
Training set size is 3847
Validation set size is 1650
Total size is 5497

11. The tokenization and encoding parts of our work are slightly different from our text (sentiment)
and token classification (NER) problems. Because both the input and the output are natural
language, we need to pass both parts through the tokenizer to encode them. The following
preprocess_function() function performs this operation. We usually apply this process
in all text-to-text problems:
def preprocess_function(examples):
    inputs = examples["text"]
    targets = examples["label"]
    model_inputs = tokenizer(inputs,
        max_length=max_length,
        padding="max_length",
        truncation=True,
        return_tensors="pt")
    labels = tokenizer(targets,
        max_length=max_target_len,
        padding="max_length",
        truncation=True,
        return_tensors="pt")
    labels = labels["input_ids"]

Hands-on PEFT experiments

    labels[labels == tokenizer.pad_token_id] = -100
    model_inputs["labels"] = labels
    return model_inputs

12. Now, it’s time to choose the model. Model selection is a critical step because it must be compatible
with your hardware resources. So, how do we choose a model based on hardware capacity? We
can follow a rough formula for calculation. The formula is so simple that you will only need a
GPU support of 10 times the number of parameters of a language model. For example, a BERT
base model has 110 million parameters. It will cost you (110Mx10) 1.2 GB GPU. This is why
the BERT base model is very comfortable with the latest resources.
If we use the 3-billion-parameter google/flan-t5-xl model, the cost will be 3Bx10 = ~30
GB GPU (one parameter requires a 10-byte GPU). This is a very rough calculation. Likewise,
flan-t5-base with 250M parameters (~2.5 GB GPU is needed) or flan-t5-large
with 780M parameters (~8 GB GPU is needed) are the other calculations. As 16 GB GPU has
become a widely common resource recently, we can start by training flan-t5-base in this
experiment. We have commented out the other two bigger alternatives now. As I now have a
NVIDIA A100 40 GB GPU, I can train the pipeline with flan-t5-xlarge later.
13. Now, we load tokenizer as follows:
model_name_or_path="google/flan-t5-base" # 250M parameters
#model_name_or_path="google/flan-t5-large" #780M parameters
#model_name_or_path="google/flan-t5-xl" # 3B parameters
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name_or_path)

14. We will pass the snli_sample_dict object through the process function that I have
prepared. There is a sequence length issue that needs to be considered carefully here: input
and output size. For efficiency, I am trying to keep these values as small as possible but not
damage the dataset, so that the model runs quickly. When we examine the dataset, we can see
that the safe values for input and output sizes are around 150 and 10, respectively, based on the
maximum token count. There is no input or output sequence exceeding these values. We can
use the tokenizer.tokenize() function to measure it. We skip this calculation now.
15. Let’s run the following code:
max_length = 150
max_target_len=10
snli_processed = snli_sampled_dict.map(
    preprocess_function,
    batched=True,
    num_proc=1,
    remove_columns=snli_sampled_dict["train"].column_names,
    load_from_cache_file=False,
    )

245

246

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

train_dataset = snli_processed["train"]
eval_dataset = snli_processed["validation"]

16. Let’s have a quick look at the encoded dataset:
pd.DataFrame(train_dataset).head(3)

The output is as follows:

Figure 9.5 – A processed dataset with tokenizer

As you can see, the input and label are converted from text (string) to a list of token IDs.
17. Now, we will define DataLoader in the following code. When selecting the batch size (32
here), we were generous because we have plenty of space in our GPU capacity. If you receive a
memory error with this value, choose a smaller batch size. However, keep in mind that smaller
batch size values may affect modeling performance. The recent report suggests that a batch size
of 16 or 32 gives the optimum performance. But it is subject to your task:
batch_size = 32
train_dataloader = DataLoader(
    train_dataset,
    shuffle=True,
    collate_fn=default_data_collator,
    batch_size=batch_size,
    pin_memory=True)
eval_dataloader = DataLoader(
    eval_dataset,
    collate_fn=default_data_collator,
    batch_size=batch_size,
    pin_memory=True)

18. In the following code snippet, we will train our model with LoRA by controlling the with_
peft=True variable. Then, for comparison, we will perform vanilla training without using
LoRA. The main difference between the two trainings is that the get_peft_model()
method indicates that the T5 model will be trained with LoRA. We arrange the necessary

Hands-on PEFT experiments

information regarding configuration with the LoraConfig object. Another difference is
the learning_rate value. In our previous experiment with adapter-transformers, we
kept the learning_rate higher when applying PEFT. In our current experiment, the
learning_rate value is kept at 1e-3 with PEFT (Lora), while it is 5e-5 without it. For
now, we will run this code with the with_peft=True setting. Then, we will set this Boolean
value to False, which means we apply vanilla training to see the difference between the two:
with_peft=True
model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM\
    .from_pretrained(model_name_or_path)
    lr=2e-5
if with_peft:
    lr=1e-3
    peft_config = LoraConfig(
        task_type=TaskType.SEQ_2_SEQ_LM,
        inference_mode=False,
        r=8,
        lora_alpha=32,
        lora_dropout=0.1)
    model = get_peft_model(model, peft_config)
    model.print_trainable_parameters()
OUTPUT:
trainable params: 884K || all params: 248M || trainable: 0.35%

If the r variable in this code controls the degree of the low-rank subspace, the recommended
value in the LoRA paper (Hu, Edward J., et al. “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language
models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021)) for this variable is 8. Accordingly, the number
of trainable parameters is 884,736 for flan-t5-base. This accounts for 0.35% of the entire
model parameters. If you set the r variable to 4 and try again, you will see that the number of
trainable parameters decreases to 442,368 (0.17%). However, we need to control whether we
sacrifice success or not while changing it.
19. We will use a classic nested training and evaluation loop as suggested in the legacy code of the
repository (https://huggingface.co/docs/peft) as follows:
device="cuda"
model = model.to(device)
num_epochs = 3
optimizer = torch.optim.AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=lr)
lr_scheduler = get_linear_schedule_with_warmup(
    optimizer=optimizer,
    num_warmup_steps=0,
    num_training_steps=\
        (len(train_dataloader) * num_epochs),)

247

248

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

import time
st = time.time()
for epoch in range(num_epochs):
    model.train()
    total_loss = 0
    for step, batch in enumerate(tqdm(train_dataloader)):
        batch={k:v.to(device) for k, v in batch.items()}
        outputs = model(**batch)
        loss = outputs.loss
        total_loss += loss.detach().float()
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        lr_scheduler.step()
        optimizer.zero_grad()
model.eval()
eval_loss = 0
eval_preds = []
for step, batch in enumerate(tqdm(eval_dataloader)):
    batch = {k: v.to(device) for k, v in batch.items()}
    with torch.no_grad():
        outputs = model(**batch)
        loss = outputs.loss
        eval_loss += loss.detach().float()
        eval_preds.extend(
            tokenizer.batch_decode(
            torch.argmax(outputs.logits, -1)\
            .detach().cpu().numpy(),
            skip_special_tokens=True)
        )
eval_loss_avg = eval_loss / len(eval_dataloader)
train_loss_avg = total_loss / len(train_dataloader)
print(f"{epoch=}-> {train_loss_avg=}\t {eval_loss_avg=}")
et = time.time()
elapsed_time = et - st

20. Now, we will see the overall performance of PEFT with the following code:
zipped=zip(eval_preds,
snli_sampled_dict["validation"]["label"])
q=[real.strip() in pred.strip()\
    for pred,real in zipped]

Hands-on PEFT experiments

print(f"{model_name_or_path=}")
print(f"{num_epochs=}")
print(f"{elapsed_time=:.2f} seconds" \
    + (" with PEFT" if with_peft else " without   PEFT"))
print(f"Accuracy={sum(q)/len(q):.2f}")

The output of the code is as follows:
model_name_or_path='google/flan-t5-base'
num_epochs = 3
elapsed_time = 90.51 seconds with PEFT
Accuracy = 0.86

21. Now, let’s run the same code with with_peft=False. We will get the following output. As you
can see, the training process without LoRA is worse than with LoRA in terms of running time:
The output is as follows:
model_name_or_path='google/flan-t5-base'
num_epochs=3
elapsed_time=117.82 seconds without PEFT
Accuracy=:84

When we try scaling the model size, we obtain a result that looks like the following table:
With LoRA
Model
# params
flan-t5-base 250M
f l a n - t 5 - 780M
large
f l a n - t 5 - 3B
xlarge

Time (sec.)

Without LoRA
Accuracy
86

Time

Accuracy

91

117

84

280

90

369

90

879

92

OOM

OOM

Table 9.2 – Performance comparison of the FLAN-t5 checkpoints

Note
For flan-t5-xlarge, an out-of-memory (OOM) error was encountered with a batch
size of 32. Lowering the batch size would resolve this error, but in this case, the comparison
would become invalid.

249

250

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

This table tells us two things. First, training models with LoRA show good performance and efficiency
in terms of speed without sacrificing accuracy. On the other hand, as we scale the model parameters
by using larger models, our training slows down while our model performance begins to improve. As
you can see, we obtained accuracy values of 86, 90, and 92, respectively for the base, large, and
xlarge models of FLAN. But we could not say the model training with LoRA outperforms vanilla
training, at least for now.
1.

Now, we will save the model and see the memory used:
peft_model_path="my_lora_model"
model.save_pretrained(peft_model_path)
!ls -lh $peft_model_path
total 9.2M
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 333 May 25 20:22 adapter_config.json
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 3.5M May 25 20:22 adapter_model.bin

Note
LoRA is a smaller model that can be trained more quickly. However, loading the base model and
the LoRA model separately may cause delays in inference. To minimize these delays, the PEFT
library includes a function called merge_and_unload(). This function merges the adapter
weights with the base model, making it easier to use the merged model as a standalone model.
2.

Merging and saving the model is as follows:
model = model.merge_and_unload()
model.save_pretrained("my_lora_model_merged")

3.

Loading the merged and saved model is pretty straightforward:
model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM\
    .from_pretrained("my_lora_model_merged",
        load_in_8bit=True)

4.

As you can see, the adapter model only allocates 3.5M instead of a 500 MB file. Let’s load the
saved model and infer it as follows:
from peft import PeftModel, PeftConfig
config = PeftConfig.from_pretrained(peft_model_path)
model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM\
    .from_pretrained(config.base_model_name_or_path)
model = PeftModel.from_pretrained(model,peft_model_path)
model.eval()

Hands-on PEFT experiments

my_text= snli_sampled_dict["validation"]["text"][0]
my_label= snli_sampled_dict["validation"]["label"][0]
print(f"{my_text=}")
print(f"{my_label=}")

The output is as follows:
My_text: S1:A girl wearing a black jacket and pink boots is
poking in the water of the creek with a stick, from the creek
bank.S2:The girl is poking around in the creek trying to find
something that she lost. The relation between S1 and S2 is
labeled as entailment, neutral or contradiction ?
My_label: It is neutral.

5.

Let us predict my_text:
inputs = tokenizer(my_text, return_tensors="pt")
with torch.no_grad():
    outputs = model.generate(
        input_ids=inputs["input_ids"],
        max_new_tokens=10)
print(tokenizer.batch_decode(
    outputs.detach().cpu().numpy(),
    skip_special_tokens=True))
['It is neutral'] # prediction

We successfully predicted the case. We will now discuss quantized LoRA.

Tuning with QLoRA
With the increasing number of parameters in LLMs, there has been a growing push to find more
efficient and memory-friendly methods. One recent study proposed the QLoRA model (see QLoRA:
Efficient fine-tuning of quantized LLMs, Tim Dettmers et al.), which builds upon the already efficient
LoRA model. This approach has gained widespread use in LLMs. QLoRA operates by quantizing the
LLM to 4 bits, which significantly reduces the model’s memory usage compared to LoRA. The quantized
LLM is then fine-tuned using the LoRA approach, which enables the refined model to maintain most
of the accuracy of the original LLM while being considerably faster and smaller.
To use QLoRA, simply initialize the model with the following code snippet. The remaining code is
identical to the preceding code. Please note that the code requires the bitsandbytes module,
which can be installed as follows:
!pip install bitsandbytes

251

252

Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning

Replace the last two lines of code from Step 17 with the following code:
from transformers import BitsAndBytesConfig
from peft import prepare_model_for_kbit_training
from transformers import AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM
model_name = "google/flan-t5-base"
bnb_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
    load_in_4bit=True,
    bnb_4bit_use_double_quant=True,
    bnb_4bit_quant_type="nf4",
    bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=torch.bfloat16
)
model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM\
    .from_pretrained(model_name_or_path,
    quantization_config=bnb_config,
    device_map={"":0})
model.gradient_checkpointing_enable()
model = prepare_model_for_kbit_training(model)
model = get_peft_model(model, peft_config)

Please restart this process from Step 17 and see how we can get a better running time while maintaining
most of the accuracy of the original model and LoRA.
Well done! Congratulations! With the help of PEFT, we have successfully solved two different problems,
achieving the same level of success without having to train the entire language model and saving time
in the process.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed how to make the fine-tuning process more effective with PEFT. We covered
three different PEFT methods: additive, selective, and low-rank. We utilized the adapter-transformers
and HF’s PEFT framework for the hands-on experiments. We took text classification and NLI tasks
and solved them with two Python PEFT libraries.
Besides their benefits, LLMs place big barriers in front of us such as training, fine-tuning, and inference.
How to overcome these barriers is an important field of study. In the future, we will focus on how to
handle, control, and utilize LLMs, as well as how to democratize them. In this chapter, we only focused
on how to efficiently fine-tune them, but there are many aspects that we can work on!
In the next chapter, we will discuss how to work with LLMs.

References

References
• Zaken, Elad Ben, Shauli Ravfogel, and Yoav Goldberg. “Bitfit: Simple parameter-efficient finetuning for transformer-based masked language-models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10199 (2021).
• Sung, Yi-Lin, Varun Nair, and Colin A. Raffel. “Training neural networks with fixed sparse masks.”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021): 24193-24205.
• He, Shwai, et al. “Sparseadapter: An easy approach for improving the parameter-efficiency of
adapters.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04284 (2022).

253

Part 3:
Advanced Topics

In this part, we delve into a variety of advanced topics that are crucial for the field of NLP. We will
explore advanced model architecture designs, including Large Language Models (LLMs) and efficient
transformers, as well as multilingual LMs. Additionally, we will cover other technical subjects such as
Explainable AI (XAI), model tracking, deployment techniques, and serving models in a production
environment.
This part has the following chapters:
• Chapter 10, Large Language Models
• Chapter 11, Explainable AI (XAI) for NLP
• Chapter 12, Working with Efficient Transformers
• Chapter 13, Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling
• Chapter 14, Serving Transformer Models
• Chapter 15, Model Tracking and Monitoring

10
Large Language Models
The field of large language models (LLMs) has made significant progress in recent years with the
development of models such as GPT-3 (175B), PaLM (540B), BLOOM (175B), LLaMA(65B),
Falcon(180B), Mistral (7B), and many others. These models have shown impressive abilities in various
natural language tasks. It may be challenging to cover such an important topic in a short book section.
We have already covered many aspects of the topic, especially in Chapter 4. Moreover, throughout the
book, we have discussed the paradigm of neural language models and their training process.
In this chapter, we discuss LLMs and run a couple of experiments. We will also show that it is possible
to fine-tune LLMs using a similar process as in the previous chapters, with only minor differences.
We will discuss the following in detail:
• Why large language models?
• Fine-tuning large language models

Technical requirements
We will need the following packages:
• transformers==4.35.2
• accelerate==0.25.0
• bitsandbytes== 0.42.0
• peft==0.7.1
• trl== 0.7.9

258

Large Language Models

Why large language models?
What exactly defines a “normal” language model when we talk about a large language model? Sometimes
people use the terms “language model” and “large language model” interchangeably, but they may
actually refer to different things as every LLM is an LM, but not every LM is an LLM.
In the past, we referred to models that calculate the likelihood of the next word in a sequence using
n-grams as “language models.” Nowadays, “large language models” typically refers to transformer-based
neural models with billions of parameters trained on massive datasets such as ChatGPT and LLaMA.
These models are all generative language models. Encoder-only language models with around 100 million
parameters, such as BERT, and simple n-gram models can be considered language models (LMs).
To simplify things, we can say that the term LLM refers to decoder-only models with more than 1 billion
parameters and a generative feature. These two features emerged because recent studies have shown
that when the models are scaled and trained with large datasets, they perform very well. Specifically,
their zero- and few-shot performances improve, and they are able to follow given instructions very
effectively with respect to size. Additionally, the generative feature allows us to approach any type of
problem within this framework, as the input and output are in a free-text format, which has popularized
prompt engineering. We can use an LLM to generate numeric predictions or even computer code
for various NLP problems.
Current trends in LLMs include Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF).
We can formalize the steps of the RLHF paradigm as follows:
• Self-supervised: Let the model gain knowledge on its own
• Supervised: Provide information for the model to learn
• Human feedback: Observe the model and correct its behavior
As shown in the following figure (Figure 10.1), the initial stage involves training vanilla pre-training
language models (PTLMs). In this stage, we use a specific self-supervised objective function, such
as next-word prediction, to enhance the model’s language understanding capacity. In the second step,
we adapt the model to follow natural language instructions by utilizing instruction-following datasets.
Through this process, the language model gains knowledge of various tasks and becomes capable of
solving unfamiliar problems.

Why large language models?

Figure 10.1 – A high-level representation of RLHF

In the final stage (step 3), a distinct feature is introduced compared to the traditional pre-training
and fine-tuning two-stage process. This last stage highlights the importance of a reward function
and policy optimization for reinforcement learning (RL). Human annotators actively participate in
experiments with the model and rank its results. These rankings are used to evaluate the text outputs
generated by the language model. In the field of RLHF, one of the primary research areas focuses on
developing a reward model that accurately represents these human preferences.

Importance of reward function
With the release of ChatGPT, there has been a great deal of excitement both within and beyond the
field regarding LLMs. To put it simply, a large language model is essentially just a bigger version of a
language model, as the name suggests. However, the exact size of “large” is still unclear. To give you
an idea of scale, models with fewer than billions of parameters are not considered large today. It’s
important to note that this notion of scale is completely relative. A billion-parameter model may be
considered large now, but in a few years or even months, it may no longer hold true.

259

260

Large Language Models

Not only the scale but also other metrics affect the quality of these models. The quality, in this case,
is not quantified as numbers reported in scientific articles because there is currently no reliable
measurement for understanding the quality of the output. However, we can still find ways to measure
it. Let’s consider a scenario where you want an Open Book Question Answering (OBQA) model to
be able to answer questions related to a specific context. In this case, you may expect the model to
provide exact answers directly taken from the respective context. However, for other use cases, you
may prefer the answers to be more conversational and delivered in a specific tone of voice rather than
being extracted from the context.
Based on the example provided, if you require a conversational OBQA model, you may reject a model
with higher accuracy and instead choose one that offers the desired tone of voice and writing style.
In the following example, we see the output of an encoder-based QA model fine-tuned with the
SQuAD dataset (https://huggingface.co/datasets/squad):

Figure 10.2 – Question answering using https://huggingface.co/
distilbert/distilbert-base-cased-distilled-squad

Why large language models?

The following example is taken from the ChatGPT interface:

Figure 10.3 – Question answering using ChatGPT

As you can see from the preceding figure, the first model is just a question-answering fine-tuned
model but the second one is an LLM that also can understand the instructions you have given to it.
Supervised learning, depicted as step 2 in Figure 10.1, has proven to be beneficial in the development of
models such as GPT and T5. These models are capable of learning multiple tasks by utilizing prompts.
However, a new training scheme, shown in step 3, has been introduced to enhance the models’ ability
to produce results in a more desired manner. This approach incorporates human feedback to guide
the models. Similar to many reinforcement learning approaches, a reward function is utilized to
accomplish this task. The reward function plays a crucial role in guiding the model’s learning process
and enabling it to generate the desired output. In the context of NLP, it is important to model the
reward function itself.
A model trained on textual examples determines preferences, which requires training using labeled
data. Without a reward model, an LM that solely relies on human-labeled data would be insufficient
for training. However, only using the reward model to fine-tune results leads to lower ratings for larger
models. An LM can take advantage of this and generate misleading outputs, which highlights the
need for an original model to stay aligned and prevent such situations. The best approach is to apply
a penalty based on the KL divergence between the original model and the reinforcement learning
(RL) tuned model. However, the story behind LLMs is not only about this. Very large models come
with risks; when trained on open web data, they naturally contain biases. For production purposes, it
is important to augment these models with another model that can identify harmful, toxic, or abusive
content. Otherwise, even with a well-rated and conversational model, there is still a possibility of
unintentionally offending individuals.

261

262

Large Language Models

The instruction-following ability of LLMs
T0 is a family of open-source models that are vastly trained on many tasks. In the following figure,
you can see the related training sets used to train them.

Figure 10.4 – T0 training sets from https://huggingface.co/bigscience/T0

As an example, we will try to use T0_3B, which is a 3-billion-parameter version of the T0 series. To
demonstrate its capabilities, we will try to examine two different case scenarios: coreference resolution
and sentiment analysis.

Fine-tuning large language models

You need to have good GPU capacity, such as A100, to run the following code. First, install the
necessary libraries:
!pip install transformers sentencepiece

Second, we need to load the model and the respective tokenizer:
from transformers import(AutoTokenizer,
AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bigscience/T0_3B")
model = AutoModelForSeq2SeqLM.from_pretrained("bigscience/T0_3B")

Afterward, we can use it with the respective instruction prompt for sentiment analysis:
inputs = tokenizer.encode("Is this review positive or negative?
Review: This book covers many different ascpect of NLP. I highly
recommend buying it!", return_tensors="pt")
outputs = model.generate(inputs)
print(tokenizer.decode(outputs[0]))
Output: Positive

As you can see from the instruction prompt, it is a sentiment analysis task. For coreference resolution,
we get the following output:
Input: Meysam lives in Germany. He has been living in Berlin for a
long time. In the previous sentence, decide who 'he' is referring to.
Output: Meysam
As you can see from the example, the model is capable of understanding
the instructions that you give it. Natural instructions and
instruction fine-tuning with the help of using different prompt
alternatives (instead of only using the same prompt for training)
broadens the model's capabilities.

Well done! Now we will fine-tune an LLM, LLaMA, in the next section.

Fine-tuning large language models
The main purpose of LLMs is to provide zero-shot task generalization with prompt engineering.
However, we may still want to fine-tune them for specific tasks. Here, we will fine-tune the most
popular open source language model, LLaMA, with the SQuAD dataset. Please note that we can merge
different datasets into a single dataset with formatting and train the model. If you want, you can try
this in a multi-task experiment. Here, for the sake of simplicity, we are proceeding with a single dataset.

263

264

Large Language Models

We will use the following techniques for fine-tuning an LLM:
• PEFT: As we discussed in Chapter 9, we will update fewer parameters in the model instead of
the entire model using LoRA. The key benefit of Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) is its
significant reduction in the number of parameters to be trained. This reduction accelerates and
simplifies the training process – a valuable attribute for large-scale machine learning projects
such as LLM where time and efficiency are vital.
• Model quantization: As we discussed in Chapter 9, we will apply methods that use less
memory, such as using 4-bit variables instead of 32-bit variables in model parameters using
bitsandbytes. Quantization, a method that reduces bit numbers, optimizes computational and
memory costs by using low-precision data types such as 8-bit integers rather than 32-bit floating
points. This results in less memory usage, lower energy consumption, and faster operations. It
also supports embedded devices’ integer data types. Essentially, it’s about transitioning from a
high-precision to a low-precision data type.
• TRL: We will have a simpler, faster fine-tuning experience with the TRL package with efficient
memory usage. The TRL library, supported by the Hugging Face team, is a full stack tool for
fine-tuning and aligning transformer language and diffusion models using methods such as
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), Reward Modeling (RM), and Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO), as well as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO). Install the necessary packages
as follows:
!pip install accelerate ==0.25.0 bitsandbytes ==0.42.0   peft
==0.7.1 transformers ==4.35.2 trl ==0.7.9

And import the functions and classes:
import os, torch
from trl import SFTTrainer
from peft import LoraConfig, PeftModel
from datasets import load_dataset
from transformers import (
    AutoModelForCausalLM,
    AutoTokenizer,
    TrainingArguments,
    BitsAndBytesConfig,
    HfArgumentParser,
    pipeline,
)

Building instruction-following datasets is an important step when training an LLM. The quality and
variety of data are essential. Having data of various types and fields will enhance the model in terms of
multi-task objectives and zero-shot generalization. At this stage, we will perform a training experiment
using the SQuAD dataset to maintain simplicity in the process. However, in your own scenarios, you
can incorporate different tasks and expand the range of data.

Fine-tuning large language models

In the following code, we take 1,000 samples for training and 350 samples for evaluation. You can use
the entire dataset in your run, but it will take a long time. Let’s do the following:
import pandas as pd
dataset = load_dataset("squad")
train=pd.DataFrame(dataset["train"].select(range(1000)))
val=pd.DataFrame(dataset["train"].select(range(1000,1350)))
train.iloc[:,2:].head()

Figure 10.5 – SQuAD dataset screenshot

In the output, you can see the presence of context, question, and answer. It is important to remember
that during the fine-tuning of the T5 model in the preceding chapters, we transformed the dataset
into a text-to-text format. Now, we have just a single text. We must structure the dataset according to
the LLaMA template as outlined here:
<s>[INST] Context:  ... Question ? [/INST] Answer... </s>

We transform every triple (context, question, answer) in a string like <s> [INST] ... [/
INST]... </s>. Let us transform the dataset:
train["text"]=train.apply(lambda x:
    f"<s>[INST]Context: {x.context} \
        Question: {x.question}[/INST] \
        {x.answers['text'][0]} </s>",
    axis=1)
val["text"]=val.apply(lambda x:
    f"<s>[INST]Context: {x.context} \
        Question: {x.question}[/INST] \
        {x.answers['text'][0]} </s>",
    axis=1)

265

266

Large Language Models

from datasets import Dataset
train_dataset=Dataset.from_pandas(train[["text"]])
eval_dataset=Dataset.from_pandas(val[["text"]])

Please note that in the preceding code, we have added a new column called "text". We have
re-expressed all the content (context, question, answer) in that column, which will be the main focus
of the model.
Now we will set up LoRA. We previously used LoRA in Chapter 9 to optimize the T5 model. It is a
technique that focuses on reducing the size of models, enabling calculations on less memory. We set
it as follows:
peft_config = LoraConfig(
    lora_alpha=16,
    lora_dropout=0.1,
    r=64,
    bias="none",
    task_type="CAUSAL_LM",
)

Quantization is a technique that reduces numerical precision in models. Instead of using high-precision
data types such as 32-bit floating-point numbers, quantization uses lower-precision data types such as
8-bit or 4-bit integers. This reduces memory usage and speeds up model execution while maintaining
accuracy. We set it as follows:
compute_dtype = getattr(torch, "float16")
bnb_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
    load_in_4bit=True,
    bnb_4bit_quant_type=»nf4»,
    bnb_4bit_compute_dtype=compute_dtype,
    bnb_4bit_use_double_quant=False,
)

Now we get the LLaMA model. To access the LLaMA model, we follow these steps:
1.

LLaMa is a gated model, which means that access needs to be granted before it can be used.
To request access, please follow this link: https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/
Llama-2-7b-chat-hf.

2.

Once access has been granted, you will need to authenticate with the Hugging Face Hub. To
do this, create a token in your Settings tab (https://huggingface.co/settings/
tokens) or navigate to Hugging Face Settings > Access Tokens > New token and generate
a new read token. Make sure to copy this access token as instructed.

Fine-tuning large language models

You will encounter the following screen:

Figure 10.6 – Access LLaMA 2 on Hugging Face

We pass our read token to get the permission as follows:
from huggingface_hub import login
access_token_read = "hf_BLA_BLA" #<-paste your token here
login(token = access_token_read)

3.

Now it is time to load the LLaMA model. We load a particular LLaMA checkpoint, metallama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, and its tokenizer as follows:
# LLaMA model
model_name="meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf"
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    model_name,
    quantization_config=bnb_config,
    device_map={"": 0}
)
model.config.use_cache = False
model.config.pretraining_tp = 1
# Tokenizer
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name,
trust_remote_code=True)
tokenizer.pad_token = tokenizer.eos_token
tokenizer.padding_side = "right"

4.

We will use the SFTTRainer class of the trl library, which is a very talented wrapper
function. We just pass the PEFT and quantization objects that we have defined to this trainer.
We also tell the trainer to focus on the text column and not something else:
training_arguments = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir="my_llama",
    num_train_epochs=3,

267

268

Large Language Models

    per_device_train_batch_size=4,
    gradient_accumulation_steps=1,
    optim="paged_adamw_32bit",
    evaluation_strategy="epoch",
    learning_rate=2e-4,
    weight_decay=0.001,
    fp16=True,
    bf16=True, # if you have A100 resource, you can set it
    lr_scheduler_type="linear"
)
from trl import SFTTrainer
trainer = SFTTrainer(
    model=model,
    train_dataset=train_dataset,
    eval_dataset=eval_dataset,
    peft_config=peft_config,
    dataset_text_field="text",
    max_seq_length=None,
    tokenizer=tokenizer,
    args=training_arguments)

5.

Now we start the training process as follows:
trainer.train()

Great job! You may see that the loss keeps increasing, which is not a good sign for training. This is
because we are using a small portion of the dataset. When we use the entire dataset, we may see a
better training process. We have just fine-tuned the LLaMA model.
Now let’s try the model with the inference code that follows. We pass the context and question as follows:
prompt='''
Context:Architecturally, the school has a Catholic character. Atop the
Main Building's gold dome is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary.
Immediately in front of the Main Building and facing it, is a copper
statue of Christ with arms upraised with the legend "Venite Ad Me
Omnes".
Next to the Main Building is the Basilica of the Sacred Heart.
Immediately behind the basilica is the Grotto, a Marian place of
prayer and reflection.
It is a replica of the grotto at Lourdes, France where the Virgin Mary
reputedly appeared to Saint Bernadette Soubirous in 1858.
At the end of the main drive (and in a direct line that connects
through 3 statues and the Gold Dome),
is a simple, modern stone statue of Mary.
Question:To whom did the Virgin Mary allegedly appear in 1858 in
Lourdes France?

Summary

'''
# Expected answer:  Saint Bernadette Soubirous
squad_llama = pipeline(task="text-generation",
                       model=model,
                       tokenizer=tokenizer,
                       max_length=350)
result = squad_llama(f"<s>[INST] {prompt} [/INST]")
print(result[0]['generated_text'])
Output: Saint Bernadette Soubirous

Perfect! We have got what we expected (Saint Bernadette Soubirous). It is just a straightforward
test with a basic example. We need to assess LLM using effective evaluation techniques. Currently, our
main focus is not on evaluating LLM, as it is beyond the scope of this chapter.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the concept of LLMs. We explored how models such as T5 can generate
diverse responses when given different prompts. Additionally, we successfully trained LLaMA, an
open-source language model, using the PEFT and quantization techniques. Although we didn’t
extensively delve into LLMs in this chapter, we touched upon them to some extent. Looking ahead,
the next chapter will delve into explainable artificial intelligence, specifically from the perspective of
natural language processing.

269

11
Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP
The increasing availability of large language models (LLMs) has brought the trade-off between the
accuracy and interpretability of a model’s output to the forefront. The biggest challenge in explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) studies is dealing with the large number of layers and parameters present
in deep neural models. So, how are we going to solve this problem? Will we be able to find a way
to understand how a deep model makes a decision? The simple answer is no, but the other answer
is somewhat.
In this chapter, we will only approach this problem in terms of Transformers. It will be examined
from two perspectives. First of all, the self-attention mechanism, which is the most relevant part
of the Transformer architecture regarding explainability, will be examined. This mechanism can
make how the Transformer model processes an input understandable to humans. Various attention
visualization tools will be used for this purpose by providing important functions for interpretability
and explainability. First, we will discuss how to visualize the inner parts of attention and will interpret
the learned representations, which help us understand the information encoded by self-attention heads
in the Transformer. The most interesting characteristic of attention is that certain heads correspond
to a certain aspect of syntax or semantics. Secondly, we will try to explain how a transformer model
makes a decision with two important approaches, LIME and SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP).
Briefly, we will cover the following topics in this chapter:
• Interpreting attention heads
• Explaining a decision by the LIME approach
• Explaining a decision by the SHAP approach

272

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

Technical requirements
The code for this chapter is found at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/MasteringTransformers-Second-Edition, which is the GitHub repository for this book. We will be
using Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises that require Python 3.6.0 or above, and the
following packages will need to be installed:
• tensorflow
• pytorch
• transformers >=4.00
• bertviz
• ipywidgets
• lime
• shape

Interpreting attention heads
As with most deep learning (DL) architectures, both the success of Transformer models and how
they learn have been not fully understood, but we know that Transformers—remarkably—learn many
linguistic features of the language. A significant amount of learned linguistic knowledge is distributed
both in the hidden state and in the self-attention heads of the pretrained model. Recent substantial
studies have been published and many tools have been developed to understand and better explain
the phenomena.
Thanks to some natural language processing (NLP) community tools, we can interpret the information
learned by the self-attention heads in a Transformer model. The heads can be interpreted naturally,
thanks to the weights between tokens. We will soon see that in further experiments in this section,
certain heads correspond to a certain aspect of syntax or semantics. We can also observe surface-level
patterns and many other linguistic features.
In the following subsections, we will conduct some experiments using community tools to observe
these patterns and features in the attention heads. Recent studies have already revealed many of the
features of self-attention. Let’s highlight some of them before we get into the experiments. For example,
most of the heads attend to delimiter tokens such as separator (SEP) and classification (CLS), since
these tokens are never masked out and bear segment-level information. Another observation is that
most heads pay little attention to the current token, but some heads specialize in only attending to
the next or previous tokens, especially in earlier layers.

Interpreting attention heads

Here is a list of other patterns found in recent studies that we can easily observe in our experiments:
• Attention heads in the same layer show similar behavior
• Particular heads correspond to specific aspects of syntax or semantic relations
• Some heads encode so that the direct objects tend to attend to their verbs, such as <lesson,
take> or <car, drive>
• In some heads, the noun modifiers attend to their noun (for example, the hot water; the next
layer), or the possessive pronoun attends to the head (for example, her car)
• Some heads encode so that passive auxiliary verbs attend to a related verb, such as Been
damaged and was taken
• In some heads, coreferential mentions attend to themselves, such as talks-negotiation,
she-her, and President-Biden
• The lower layers usually have information about word positions
• Syntactic features are observed earlier in the transformer, while high-level semantic information
appears in the upper layers
• The final layers are the most task-specific and are therefore very effective for downstream tasks
To observe these patterns, we can use two important tools, exBERT and BertViz, here. These tools
have almost the same functionality. We will start with exBERT.

Visualizing attention heads with exBERT
The exBERT is a visualization tool to see the inner parts of Transformers. We will use it to visualize the
attention heads of the BERT-base-cased model, which is the default model in the exBERT interface.
Unless otherwise stated, the model we will use in the following examples is BERT-base-cased. This
contains 12 layers and 12 self-attention heads in each layer, which makes for 144 self-attention heads.
We will learn how to utilize exBERT step by step, as follows:
1.

Let’s click on the exBERT link hosted by Hugging Face: https://huggingface.co/
exbert.

2.

Enter the sentence The cat is very sad . and see the output, as follows:

273

274

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

Figure 11.1 – exBERT interface

In the preceding screenshot, the left tokens attend to the right tokens. The thickness of the
lines represents the value of the weights. Because CLS and SEP tokens have very frequent and
dense connections, we cut off the links associated with them for simplicity. Please see the Hide
Special Tokens toggle switch. What we see now is the attention mapping at layer 1, where the
lines correspond to the sum of the weights on all heads. This is called a multi-head attention
mechanism, in which 12 heads work in parallel to each other. This mechanism allows us to
capture a wider range of relationships than is possible with single-head attention. This is why
we see a broadly attending pattern in Figure 11.1. We can also observe any specific head by
clicking the Head column.
If you hover over a token on the left, you will see the specific weights of that token connecting
to the right ones. For more detailed information on using the interface, read the paper exBERT:
A Visual Analysis Tool to Explore Learned Representations in Transformer Models, Benjamin
Hoover, Hendrik Strobelt, Sebastian Gehrmann, 2019, or watch the video at the following
link: https://github.com/bhoov/exbert.
3.

Now, we will try to support the findings of other researchers addressed in the introductory
part of this section. Let’s take some heads specialized in only attending the next or previous
tokens, especially in earlier layers patterns, and see whether there’s a head that supports this.

Interpreting attention heads

4.

We will use the <Layer-No, Head-No> notation to denote a certain self-attention head for
the rest of the chapter, where the indices start at 1 for exBERT and start at 0 for BertViz—for
example, <3,7> denotes the seventh head at the third layer for exBERT. When you select the
<2,5> (or <4,12> or <6,2>) head, you will get the following output, where each token
attends to the previous token only:

Figure 11.2 – Previous-token attention pattern

5.

For the <2,12> and <3,4> heads, you will get a pattern whereby each token attends to the
next token, as follows:

Figure 11.3 – Next-token attention pattern

These heads serve the same functionality for other input sentences—that is, they work independently
of the input. You can try different sentences yourself.
We can use an attention head for advanced semantic tasks such as pronoun resolution using
a probing classifier. First, we will qualitatively check whether the internal representation has
such a capacity for pronoun resolution (or coreference resolution) or not. Pronoun resolution
is considered a challenging semantic relation task since the distance between the pronoun and
its antecedent is usually very long.
6.

Now, we take the sentence, “The cat is very sad, because it could not find food to eat.” When
you check each head, you will notice that the <9,9> and <9,12> heads encode the pronoun
relation. When hovering over it at the <9,9> head, we get the following output:

275

276

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

Figure 11.4 – The coreference pattern at the <9,9> head

The <9,12> head also works for pronoun relation. Again, on hovering over it, we get the
following output:

Figure 11.5 – The coreference pattern at the <9,12> head

Interpreting attention heads

From the preceding screenshot, we see that the it pronoun strongly attends to its antecedent, cat.
We change the sentence a bit so that the it pronoun now refers to the food token instead of the
cat token, as in, “The cat did not eat the food because it was not fresh.” As seen in the following
screenshot, which relates to the <9,9> head, it properly attends to its antecedent, food, as expected:

Figure 11.6 – The pattern at the <9,9> head for the second example

7.

Let’s look at another run, where the pronoun refers to the cat token, as in “The cat did not
eat the food because it was very angry.” In the <9,9> head, the it token mostly attends to
the cat token, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 11.7 – The pattern at the <9,9> head for the second input

277

278

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

8.

I think those are enough examples. Now, we will use the exBERT model differently to evaluate
the model capacity. Let’s restart the exBERT interface, select the last layer (layer 12), and keep
all heads. Then, enter the sentence The cat did not eat the food. and mask out
the food token. Double-clicking masks the food token out, as follows:

Figure 11.8 – Evaluating the model by masking

When you hover over that masked token, you can see the prediction distribution of the BERT-basecased model, as shown in the preceding screenshot. The first prediction is food, which is expected.
Nowadays, we exploit such features of the BERT model for data augmentation. For instance, you
can replace food with meat as a second prediction and you will have a new instance similar to the
original. For more detailed information about the tool, you can refer to exBERT’s web page: https://
exbert.net/.
Well done! In the next section, we will work with BertViz and write some Python code to access the
attention heads.

Multiscale visualization of attention heads with BertViz
Now, we will write some code to visualize heads with BertViz, which is a tool used to visualize
attention in the Transformer model, as is exBERT. It was developed by Jesse Vig in 2019 (see A
Multiscale Visualization of Attention in the Transformer Model, Jesse Vig, 2019). It is the extension of
the work of the Tensor2Tensor visualization tool (Jones, 2017). We can monitor the inner parts of a
model with multiscale qualitative analysis. The advantage of BertViz is that we can work with most
Hugging-Face-hosted models (such as BERT, GPT, and XLM through the Python API). Therefore,
we will be able to work with non-English models as well, or any pretrained model. You can access
BertViz resources and other information from the following GitHub link: https://github.
com/jessevig/bertviz.

Interpreting attention heads

Like exBERT, BertViz visualizes attention heads in a single interface. Additionally, it supports a
bird’s-eye view and a low-level neuron view, where we observe how individual neurons interact to
build attention weights. A useful demonstration video can be found at the following link: https://
vimeo.com/340841955.
Before starting, we need to install the necessary libraries, as follows:
!pip install bertviz ipywidgets transformers

We then import the following modules:
from bertviz import head_view
from transformers import BertTokenizer, BertModel

BertViz supports three views: a head view, a model view, and a neuron view. Let’s examine these
views one by one. First of all, though, it is important to point out that we started from 1 for index
layers and heads in exBERT. But in BertViz, we start from 0 for indexing, as in Python programming.
If I say a <9,9> head in exBERT, its BertViz counterpart is <8,8>.
Let’s start with the head view.

Attention head view
The head view is the BertViz equivalent of what we have experienced so far with exBERT in the
previous section. The attention head view visualizes the attention patterns based on one or more
attention heads in a selected layer:
First, we define a get_bert_attentions() function to retrieve attentions and tokens for a given
model and a given pair of sentences. The function definition is shown in the following code block:
def get_bert_attentions(model_path,sentence_a,sentence_b):
    model = BertModel.from_pretrained(model_path,
        output_attentions=True)
    tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
    inputs = tokenizer.encode_plus(sentence_a,
        sentence_b,
        return_tensors='pt',
        add_special_tokens=True)
    token_type_ids = inputs['token_type_ids']
    input_ids = inputs['input_ids']
    attention = model(input_ids,
        token_type_ids=token_type_ids)[-1]
    input_id_list = input_ids[0].tolist()
    tokens = tokenizer.convert_ids_to_tokens(input_id_list)
    return attention, tokens

279

280

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

In the following code snippet, we load the bert-base-cased model and retrieve the tokens and
corresponding attentions of the given two sentences. We then call the head_view() function at
the end to visualize the attentions. Here is the code execution:
model_path = 'bert-base-cased'
sentence_a = "The cat is very sad."
sentence_b = "Because it could not find food to eat."
attention, tokens=get_bert_attentions(model_path,
    sentence_a, sentence_b)
head_view(attention, tokens)

The code output is an interface, as displayed here:

Figure 11.9 – Head-view output of BertViz

The interface on the left of Figure 11.9 comes first. Hovering over any token on the left will show the
attention going from that token. The colored tiles at the top correspond to the attention head. Doubleclicking on any of them will make a selection and discard the rest. The thicker attention lines denote
higher attention weights.
Please remember that in the preceding exBERT examples, we observed that the <9,9> head (the
equivalent in BertViz is <8,8>, due to indexing) bears a pronoun-antecedent relationship. We observe
the same pattern in Figure 11.9, selecting Layer 8 and head 8. Then, we see the interface on the right
of Figure 11.9 when we hover over it, and we will see that it strongly attends to the cat and it tokens

Interpreting attention heads

(itself). So, can we observe these semantic patterns in other pretrained language models? Although
the heads are not exactly the same in other models, some heads can encode these semantic properties.
We also know from recent works that semantic features are mostly encoded in the higher layers.
Let’s look for a coreference pattern in a Turkish language model. The following code loads a Turkish
bert-base-cased model and takes a sentence pair. We observe here that the <8,8> head has
the same semantic feature in Turkish as in the English model, as follows:
model_path = 'dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-cased'
sentence_a = "Kedi çok üzgün."
sentence_b= "Çünkü o her zamanki gibi çok fazla yemek yedi."
attention, tokens= get_bert_attentions(model_path,
    sentence_a, sentence_b)
head_view(attention, tokens)

From the preceding code, sentence_a and sentence_b mean “The cat is sad” and “Because it ate
too much food” as usual, respectively. When hovering over o (it), it attends to Kedi (cat), as follows:

Figure 11.10 – Coreference pattern in the Turkish language model

All other tokens except o (it) mostly attend to the SEP delimiter token, which is a dominant behavior
pattern in all heads in the BERT architecture.

281

282

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

As a final example for the head view, we will interpret another language model and move on to the
model view feature. This time, we choose the bert-base-german-cased German language
model and visualize it for the input—that is, the German equivalent of the same-sentence pair we
used for Turkish.
The following code loads a German model, consumes a pair of sentences, and visualizes them:
model_path = 'bert-base-german-cased'
sentence_a = "Die Katze ist sehr traurig."
sentence_b = "Weil sie zu viel gegessen hat"
attention, tokens= get_bert_attentions(model_path,
    sentence_a, sentence_b)
head_view(attention, tokens)

When we examine the heads, we can see the coreference pattern in the 8th layer again, but this time
in the 11th head. To select the <8,11> head, pick layer 8 from the drop-down menu and doubleclick on the last head, as follows:

Figure 11.11 – Coreference relation pattern in the German language model

As you see, when hovering over sie, you will see strong attentions to Die Katze. While this <8,11>
head is the strongest one for coreference relations (known as anaphoric relations in computational
linguistics literature), this relationship may have spread to many other heads. To observe it, we will
have to check all the heads one by one.
On the other hand, BertViz’s model view feature gives us a basic bird’s-eye view to see all heads at
once. Let’s take a look at it in the next section.

Interpreting attention heads

Model view
Model view allows us to have a bird’s-eye view of attentions across all heads and layers. Self-attention
heads are shown in tabular form, with rows and columns corresponding to layers and heads, respectively.
Each head is visualized in the form of a clickable thumbnail that includes the broad shape of the
attention model.
The view can tell us how BERT works and makes it easier to interpret. Many recent studies, such as
A Primer in BERTology: What We Know About How BERT Works, Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, Anna
Rumshisky, found some clues about the behavior of the layers and came to a conclusion. We already
listed some of them in the Interpreting attention heads section. You can test these facts yourself using
BertViz’s model view.
Let’s view the German language model that we just used, as follows:
1.

First, import the following modules:
from bertviz import model_view
from Transformers import BertTokenizer, BertModel

2.

Now, we will use a show_model_view() wrapper function developed by Jesse Vig. You
can find the original code at the following link: https://github.com/jessevig/
bertviz/blob/master/notebooks/model_view_bert.ipynb.
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-TransformersSecond-Edition. We are just dropping the function header here:
def show_model_view(model, tokenizer, sentence_a,
    sentence_b=None, hide_delimiter_attn=False,
    display_mode="dark"):
. . .

3.

Let’s load the German model again. If you have already loaded it, you can skip the first five
lines. Here is the code you’ll need:
model_path='bert-base-german-cased'
sentence_a = "Die Katze ist sehr traurig."
sentence_b = "Weil sie zu viel gegessen hat"
model = BertModel.from_pretrained(model_path,
    output_attentions=True)
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
show_model_view(model, tokenizer, sentence_a,
    sentence_b,
    hide_delimiter_attn=False,
    display_mode="light")

283

284

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

This is the output:

Figure 11.12 – The model view of the German language model

This view helps us easily observe many patterns such as next-token (or previous-token) attention
patterns. As we mentioned earlier in the Interpreting attention heads section, tokens often tend to
attend to delimiters—specifically, CLS delimiters at lower layers and SEP delimiters at upper layers.
Because these tokens are not masked out, they can ease the flow of information. In the last layers,
we only observe SEP-delimiter-focused attention patterns. It could be speculated that SEP is used
to collect segment-level information, which can be used then for inter-sentence tasks such as Next
Sentence Prediction (NSP) or for encoding sentence-level meaning.
On the other hand, we observe that coreference relation patterns are mostly encoded in the <8,1>,
<8,11>, <10,1>, and <10,7> heads. Again, it can be clearly said that the <8,11> head is the
strongest head that encodes the coreference relation in the German model, which we already discussed.

Interpreting attention heads

When you click on that thumbnail, you will see the same output, as follows:

Figure 11.13 – Close-up of the <8,11> head in model view

Again, you can hover over the tokens and see the mappings.
I think that’s enough work for the head view and the model view. Now, let’s deconstruct the model
with the help of the neuron view and try to understand how these heads calculate weights.

Neuron view
So far, we have visualized computed weights for a given input. The neuron view visualizes the neurons
and the key vectors in a query and how the weights between tokens are computed based on interactions.
We can trace the computation phase between any two tokens.
Again, we will load the German model and visualize the same-sentence pair we just worked with. We
execute the following code:
from bertviz.Transformers_neuron_view import BertModel, BertTokenizer
from bertviz.neuron_view import show
model_path='bert-base-german-cased'

285

286

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

sentence_a = "Die Katze ist sehr traurig."
sentence_b = "Weil sie zu viel gegessen hat"
model = BertModel.from_pretrained(model_path,
    output_attentions=True)
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
model_type = 'bert'
show(model, model_type, tokenizer,
    sentence_a, sentence_b, layer=8, head=11)

This is the output:

Figure 11.14 – Neuron view of the coreference relation pattern (the <8,11> head)

The view helps us trace the computation of attention from the sie token that we selected on the
left to the other tokens on the right. Positive values are blue and negative values are orange. Color
intensity represents the magnitude of the numerical value. The query of sie is very similar to the
keys of Die and Katze. If you look at the patterns carefully, you will notice how similar these vectors
are. Therefore, their dot product goes higher than the other comparison, which establishes strong
attention between those tokens. We also trace the dot product and the softmax function output as we
go to the right. When clicking on the other tokens on the left, you can trace other computations as well.
Now, let’s select a head-bearing next-token attention pattern for the same input, and trace it. To do
so, we select the <2,6> head. In this pattern, virtually all the attention is focused on the next word.
We click the sie token once again, as follows:

Interpreting attention heads

Figure 11.15 – Neuron view of next-token attention patterns (the <2,6> head)

Now, the sie token is focused on the next token instead of its own antecedent (Die Katze). When
we carefully look at the query and the candidate keys, the most similar key to the query of sie is the
next token, zu. Likewise, we observe how the dot product and softmax function are applied in order.
In the next section, we will briefly talk about probing classifiers for interpreting Transformers.

Understanding the inner parts of BERT with probing classifiers
The opacity of what DL learns has led to a number of studies on the interpretation of such models.
We attempt to answer the question of which parts of a Transformer model are responsible for certain
language features, or which parts of the input lead the model to make a particular decision. To do so,
other than visualizing internal representations, we can train a classifier on the representations to predict
some external morphological, syntactic, or semantic properties. Hence, we can determine whether we
associate internal representations with external properties. The successful training of the model would be
quantitative evidence of such an association—that is, the language model has learned information relevant
to an external property. This approach is called a probing-classifier approach, which is a prominent
analysis technique in NLP and other DL studies. An attention-based probing classifier takes an attention
map as input and predicts external properties such as coreference relations or head-modifier relations.
As seen in the preceding experiments, we get the self-attention weights for a given input with the
get_bert_attention() function. Instead of visualizing these weights, we can directly transfer
them to a classification pipeline. So, with supervision, we can determine which head is suitable for
which semantic feature—for example, we can figure out which heads are suitable for coreference with
labeled data.

287

288

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

However, the framework for probing classifiers reveals that it is more complex than it may seem at
first. It is crucial to clearly define both the original dataset and model, as well as the probing dataset
and classifier. Depending on your objectives, you may want to evaluate the complexity and ease of
extracting information from the probe.
Now, let’s move on to the model-tracking part, which is crucial for building efficient models.

Explain the model decision
Even if we cannot fully understand the decisions or results of LLMs, we can understand certain aspects
that led to this decision. But first, we need to answer and understand what we are trying to explain
here. We have three aspects for it as shown in the following taxonomy diagram:

Figure 11.16 – Taxonomy of XAI in 3D

First, are we trying to understand either how a model makes decisions as a whole or its behavior in a
specific input? This distinction is referred to as the global explanation and local explanation. While
local explainers deal with the decision on a specific input, global explainers try to explain the model’s
prediction process as a whole.
The second distinction between XAI models is whether they are self-explaining or post-hoc models. In
the former approach, also known as self-explainers, models make both predictions and explanations
as seen in self-attention mechanisms. However, the self-attention mechanism is used for building
contextual word and sentence embeddings, not for a decision. Decision trees, as well-known machine
learning models, and other rule-based models are good examples of global self-explainers. The latter,
post-hoc explainability models, need additional processes to understand the model decision behavior
where a surrogate model is trained to explain the main model. This post-hoc process can be global
and local. Although LIME is a good example of producing local explanations using a surrogate model,
SHAP can function in both ways.

Explain the model decision

Another aspect of XAI is the differentiation between model-specific and model-agnostic interpretation
tools. Model-specific tools can only be used with specific models, while model-agnostic tools are
capable of explaining any black-box model.
As recent trends in machine learning are based on large neural network-based models such as LLMs,
which are often considered black-box models, the popularity of surrogate and model-agnostic
approaches is increasing. These surrogate models can help explain the behavior of the neural network
models for decisions.
In the industry, we have seen very good open-source implementations sorted by popularity as follows:
• SHAP
• LIME
• LIT
• ELI-5
• Transformers Interpret
• Captum
We first take a look at the LIME and SHAP models to understand the Transformers model decisions.
Let’s start with SHAP.

Interpret Transformers’ decision with LIME
LIME is an example of a model-agnostic, local, and post-hoc approach. The main idea behind LIME
is input perturbation. Random perturbations are applied to the input (a sentence in our case), and
their effects on the output (sentiment or category) are measured. This process uses a simple trainable
machine learning model as the main XAI surrogate model.
In the LIME process, an explanation is defined as a local linear approximation of a model’s behavior.
This is because many models are globally complex, so it is easier to approximate them in the immediate
vicinity of a particular instance. To achieve this, the instance to be explained is perturbed, and a
sparse linear model (also called a surrogate model) is learned in the vicinity of that instance. Please
see the paper “Why Should I Trust You?”: Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier, Ribeiro et al.)
for more details.
We can simplify the LIME process as follows:
1.

First, select the single prediction to be explained.

2.

Perturbate the input by randomly hiding features and collect the results of the black-box model,
which generates neighborhood data around the original single sample.

3.

Assign weights to the new neighborhood samples based on how closely they resemble the
original prediction.

289

290

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

4.

Train a less complex, interpretable linear model on these sample variations, and a surrogate
model is obtained.

5.

Finally, predict the explanations by the surrogate model for this local prediction.

Now, let’s understand the LIME process with a hands-on example using the LIME and Transformer libraries.
Let us start with installing the necessary packages:
!pip install lime transformers

We will take our Turkish Text Classification model, which has been fine-tuned on CH05, and load it
from the Hugging Face hub as seen in the following:
import lime
from lime.lime_text import LimeTextExplainer
from transformers import (AutoTokenizer,
    AutoModelForSequenceClassification)
model_path = 'savasy/bert-turkish-text-classification'
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path)
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained(model_path)
class_names =model.config.id2label.values()

We have seven classes, as follows:
class_names
Output: dict_values(['world', 'economy', 'culture', 'health',
'politics', 'sport', 'technology'])

Now, we will pass a Turkish text and interpret the classification. The text is Ünlü futbolcu Ahmet
Yıldız sene sonunda yapılacak turnuva maçları hakkında konuştu, which
means, “The famous football player Ahmet Yıldız talked about the tournament matches to be held at
the end of the year.” It is obvious that it is about sports.
The following code classifies the input and plots the class probability distribution:
import pandas as pd
import torch.nn.functional as Func
text = 'Ünlü futbolcu Ahmet Yıldız sene sonunda yapılacak turnuva
maçları hakkında konuştu'
outputs = model(**tokenizer(text,
    return_tensors="pt",
    padding=True))
probabilities = Func.softmax(outputs[0]).detach().numpy()
q=dict(zip(class_names,probabilities[0]))
pd.Series(q).plot(kind="bar")

Explain the model decision

This plots the following distribution where “sport” is selected out of seven class labels.

Figure 11.17 – Class probability distribution for Turkish Text Classification

Now, we will generate an explanation for this decision. To do so, we need to write these lines in a
function that computes the class probability distribution. The function will be used by the LIME XAI
model to generate neighbor samples and to train a linear XAI classifier. Here is the function:
def pred_prob(text):
outputs = model(**tokenizer(text,
    return_tensors="pt",
    padding=True))
ps = Func.softmax(outputs[0]).detach().numpy()
return ps

We are ready to run the Lcode. As seen in the following, we defined a LimeTextExplainer to
which class names are passed. Then, we pass the text and pred_prob class probability function ,
and select the fifth label, which is sports. The num_features parameter tells us how many features
the LIME model uses to explain a decision. In our text classification case, it means how many words
the LIME model selects for the decision explanation. The num_samples parameter tells us how

291

292

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

many neighbor samples will be generated. We normally keep this number high, such as 1K or 5K, to
train a linear classifier efficiently:
explainer = LimeTextExplainer(class_names=class_names)
exp = explainer.explain_instance(text,
    pred_prob,
    labels= [5],
    num_features=7,
    num_samples=1000)
exp.show_in_notebook(text=text)

With the execution, we see the following output. It explains that the words in brown are indicative of
the text belonging to the sports category.

Figure 11.18 – Explanation by LIME output for Turkish Text Classification

The pastel blue represents non-sports content. As seen in the output, the text classification model cares
about the sport-related terms during mapping this text to the sports category. The darker the words,
the more salient the decision. Now, let us look at another example for English. The following code
will load the Emotion classification model for English. It is a model for multi-label text classification
with 28 labels. We used it as a single-label classification model with the softmax function. The process
will be the same as the Turkish pipeline:
from transformers import AutoTokenizer,
AutoModelForSequenceClassification
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer\
    .from_pretrained("SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions")
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained("SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions")
class_names =model.config.id2label.values()

We will classify the text, "I have tried different models, but I have not yet
made a decision." The model will predict it as confusion (id=6):
text= "I have tried different models, but I have not yet made a
decision."
explainer = LimeTextExplainer(class_names=class_names)
exp = explainer.explain_instance(text,
    pred_prob,

Explain the model decision

    labels= [6],
    num_features=7,
    num_samples=1000)
exp.show_in_notebook(text=text)

It outputs the following interpretation:

Figure 11.19 – LIME Interpretation for English Emotion Classification

Just as in the previous examples, each color has a meaning. The color red represents a confusion label,
while the color green represents a non-confusion label. Here, we cropped the output of LIME. When
you run the code, you will see lots of information about color coding.
One disadvantage of LIME is that its surrogate model is based on sampled data points, making it very
sensitive to the sampling strategy used. Different sampling methods around the same local data can
lead to very different explanation results. Second, the LIME approach is based on the assumption that
a local instance can be interpreted linearly.
Now, we will do the same thing with the SHAP model!

Interpret Transformers’ decision with SHAP
One of the most common and widely used techniques in the field of XAI is SHAP. It is based on the
concept of the Shapley value from game theory. In contrast to LIME, SHAP does not always construct a
local interpretable model. Instead, it utilizes the black-box model to compute the marginal contribution
of each feature to the prediction. You can see the paper A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model
Predictions, by Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee.
By doing so, it provides insights by identifying the most important features that are driving the model’s
decision-making process both globally and locally. It calculates SHAP values for the feature importance
of words at the local level, then provides global feature importance by adding up the absolute SHAP
values for each individual prediction. The SHAP technique is gaining popularity in the field of XAI
due to its ability to provide accurate and interpretable explanations for complex DL models.
While LIME assumes that the local model needs to be linear, SHAP does not make any such assumptions.
However, a drawback of SHAP is that the calculation of SHAP values can be computationally expensive
and time-consuming. This is because it checks all the possible combinations, and it does it through
Monte Carlo simulations rather than brute force.
Now, let’s learn about the SHAP process with the following code example, using the same as in the
LIME example.

293

294

Explainable AI (XAI) in NLP

Install the necessary packages:
!pip install shap transformers

Let us load the previous 28-class English Emotion classification model:
from transformers import (AutoTokenizer,
AutoModelForSequenceClassification)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer\
    .from_pretrained("SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions")
model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained("SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions")
class_names =model.config.id2label.values()

We wrap them in a pipeline object as follows:
from transformers import pipeline
classifier= pipeline("text-classification",
    model=model,
    tokenizer=tokenizer)

Let us classify the text first:
text= "I have tried different models, but I have not yet made a decision."
classifier(text)
OUTPUT: {'label': 'confusion','score': 0.528}]

It decides on the confusion label. We will explain the decision by SHAP as follows:
import shap
explainer = shap.Explainer(classifier)
shap_values = explainer([text])

We specify the target label as confusion so that we see which feature directs the model towards
that decision. We will choose bar plot visualization as it is more readable than others:
shap.plots.bar(shap_values[0,:,"confusion"])

It outputs the following diagram:

Summary

Figure 11.20 – SHAP interpretations for English Emotion Classification

We will see a similar interpretation with LIME, more or less. As a last remark, SHAP is widely used
and perhaps more widely accepted due to its theoretical argument based on the game theory concept
of Shapley values and its simplicity. However, in LIME, we must define how we consider a neighbor.
Additionally, we build a linear local model that may not be linear in a highly complex decision surface.
In SHAP, we do not have such an assumption.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed one of the most important problems in front of AI: XAI. Explainability
becomes a serious issue as language models grow with a strong trend. We addressed two topics in
terms of Transformers only. First, we examined the self-attention mechanism in the architecture.
We tried to understand the internal process of these mechanisms with various visualization tools.
Secondly, we interpreted the decision-making process of Transformer architectures. We worked with
two model-agnostic approaches: LIME and SHAP. With these two techniques, we monitor how models
give importance to parts of inputs (words) in a simple text classification process.
In the next chapter, we will focus on a special kind of transformer namely the efficient transformer.

295

12
Working with
Efficient Transformers
So far, you have learned how to design a Natural Language Processing (NLP) architecture to achieve
successful task performance with transformers. In this chapter, you will learn first how to make efficient
models out of trained models using distillation, pruning, and quantization. Second, you will also gain
knowledge about efficient sparse transformers such as Linformer, BigBird, and Performer. You will
see how they perform on various benchmarks, such as memory versus sequence length and speed
versus sequence length. You will also see the practical use of model size reduction.
The importance of this chapter came to light as it is getting difficult to run large neural models under
limited computational capacity. It is important to have a light general-purpose language model such
as DistilBERT. This model can then be fine-tuned with good performance, like its non-distilled
counterparts. Transformer-based architectures face complexity bottlenecks due to the quadratic
complexity of the attention dot product in the transformers, especially for long-context NLP tasks.
Character-based language models, speech processing, and long documents are among the long-context
problems. In recent years, we have seen a lot of progress in making self-attention more efficient, such
as Reformer, Performer, and BigBird, as a solution to complexity. We will also briefly introduce
bitsandbytes for more efficient and easier quantization.
In short, in this chapter, you will learn about the following topics:
• Introduction to efficient, light, and fast transformers
• Implementation for model size reduction
• Working with efficient self-attention
• Using bitsandbytes for quantization

298

Working with Efficient Transformers

Technical requirements
We will be using the Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises, which require Python 3.6+, and
the following packages need to be installed:
• tensorflow
• pytorch
• transformers >=4.00
• Datasets
• sentence-transformers
• py3nvml
• bitsandbytes
All notebooks with coding exercises are available at the following GitHub link:
https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-SecondEdition

Introduction to efficient, light, and fast transformers
Transformer-based models have achieved state-of-the-art results in many NLP problems at the cost of
quadratic memory and computational complexity. We can highlight the issues regarding complexity
as follows:
• The models are not able to efficiently process long sequences due to their self-attention
mechanism, which scales quadratically with the sequence length.
• An experimental setup using a typical GPU with 16 GB can handle the sentences of 512 tokens
for training and inference. However, longer entries can cause problems.
• NLP models keep growing in size, from the 110 million parameters of BERT-Base to the 175
billion parameters of GPT-3 and the 540 billion parameters of PaLM. This notion raises concerns
about computational and memory complexity.
• We also need to care about costs, production, reproducibility, and sustainability. Hence, we
need faster and lighter transformers, especially on-edge devices.
Several approaches have been proposed to reduce computational complexity and memory footprint.
Some of these approaches focus on changing the architecture and some do not alter the original
architecture but instead make improvements to the trained model or to the training phase. We will
divide them into two groups, model size reduction and efficient self-attention.

Introduction to efficient, light, and fast transformers

Model size reduction can be accomplished using three different approaches:
• Knowledge distillation
• Pruning
• Quantization
Each of these approaches has its own way of reducing the size model, which we will describe briefly
in the Implementation for model size reduction section.
In knowledge distillation, a smaller transformer (student) can transfer the knowledge of a big model
(teacher). We train the student model so that it can mimic the teacher’s behavior or produce the same
output for the same input. The distilled model may underperform the teacher. There is a trade-off
between compression, speed, and performance.
Pruning is a model compression technique in machine learning that is used to reduce the size of the
model by removing a section of the model that contributes little to producing results. The most typical
example is decision tree pruning, which helps to reduce the complexity and increase the generalization
capacity of the model. Quantization changes model weight types from higher resolutions to lower
resolutions. For example, we use a typical floating-point number (float64) consuming 64 bits of
memory for each weight. Instead, we can use int8 in quantization, which consumes 8 bits for each
weight, and naturally has less accuracy in presenting numbers.
Self-attention heads are not optimized for long sequences. In order to solve this issue, many different
approaches have been proposed. The most efficient approach is self-attention sparsification, which
we will discuss soon. The other most widely used approach is memory-efficient backpropagation.
This approach strikes a balance between the caching of intermediate results and re-computing.
Intermediate activations computed during forward propagation are needed to compute gradients
during backward propagation. Gradient checkpoints can reduce a substantial amount of memory
footprint and computation. Another approach is pipeline parallelism algorithms. Mini-batches are
split into micro-batches, and the parallelism pipeline takes advantage of using the waiting time during
the forward and backward operations while transferring the batches to deep learning accelerators such
as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) or Tensor Processing Units (TPUs).
Parameter sharing can be counted as one of the first approaches towards efficient deep learning. The
most typical example is RNN, as depicted in Chapter 1, where the units of unfolded representation
use shared parameters. Hence, the number of trainable parameters is not affected by the input size.
Some shared parameters, which are also called weight tying or weight replication, spread the network
so that the number of trainable parameters is reduced. For instance, Linformer shares projection
matrices across heads and layers. Reformer shares the query and key at the cost of performance loss.
Now, let’s try to understand these issues with practical examples.

299

300

Working with Efficient Transformers

Implementation for model size reduction
Even though transformer-based models achieve state-of-the-art results in many aspects of NLP, they
usually share the very same problem: they are big models and are not fast enough to be used. In
business cases where it is necessary to embed them inside a mobile application or in a web interface,
it is impossible if you try to use the original models.
In order to improve the speed and size of these models, some techniques have been proposed, which
are listed here:
• Distillation (also known as knowledge distillation)
• Pruning
• Quantization
For each of these techniques, we provide a separate subsection to address the technical and
theoretical insights.

Working with DistilBERT for knowledge distillation
The process of transferring knowledge from a bigger model to a smaller one is called knowledge
distillation. In other words, there is a teacher model and a student model; the teacher is typically a
bigger and stronger model while the student is smaller and weaker.
This technique is used in various problems, from vision to acoustic models and NLP. A typical
implementation of this technique is shown in Figure 12.1:

Figure 12.1 – Knowledge distillation for image classification

Implementation for model size reduction

DistilBERT is one of the most important models in this field and has gotten the attention of researchers
and even businesses. This model, which tries to mimic the behavior of BERT-Base, has 50% fewer
parameters and achieves 95% of the teacher model’s performance.
Here’s some information about DistilBERT. All figures are in comparison with the original BERT:
• DistilBert is 1.7x compressed and 1.6x faster with 97% relative performance
• Mini-BERT is 6x compressed, 3x faster, and has 98% relative performance
• TinyBERT is 7.5x compressed, has 9.4x speed, and 97% relative performance
The distillation training step that is used to train the model is very simple using PyTorch (the original
description and code is available at https://medium.com/huggingface/distilbert8cf3380435b5):
import torch
import torch.nn as nn
import torch.nn.functional as F
from torch.optim import Optimizer
KD_loss = nn.KLDivLoss(reduction='batchmean')
def kd_step(teacher: nn.Module,
    student: nn.Module,
    temperature: float,
    inputs: torch.tensor,
    optimizer: Optimizer):
    teacher.eval()
    student.train()
    with torch.no_grad():
        logits_t = teacher(inputs=inputs)
    logits_s = student(inputs=inputs)
    loss = KD_loss(input=F.log_softmax(
        logits_s/temperature,
        dim=-1),
        target=F.softmax(
            logits_t/temperature,
            dim=-1))
    loss.backward()
    optimizer.step()
    optimizer.zero_grad()

301

302

Working with Efficient Transformers

This model-supervised training provides us with a smaller model that is very similar to the base model
in behavior. The loss function used here is Kullback-Leibler loss to ensure that the student model
mimics the good and bad aspects of the teacher model with no modification to the decision on the
last softmax logits. This loss function shows how different two distributions are from each other;
a greater difference means a higher loss value. The reason for using this loss function is to make the
student model try to completely mimic the behavior of the teacher. The GLUE macro scores for BERT
and DistilBERT are just 2.8% different.

Pruning transformers
Pruning is the process of setting weights at the layers to zero based on a pre-specified criterion. This
method eliminates weights that are too low in value and do not affect the results too much. Likewise,
we prune some redundant parts of the transformer network. The pruned networks are more likely
to generalize better than the original one. We have seen a successful pruning operation because the
pruning process probably keeps the true underlying explanatory factors and discards the redundant
subnetwork. Then, the less salient weights or units whose removals have a small effect on the model
performance are discarded.
There are two approaches:
• Unstructured pruning: Individual weights with a small saliency (or the least weight magnitude)
are removed no matter which part of the neural network they are located in
• Structured pruning: This approach prunes heads or layers
However, the pruning process has to be compatible with modern GPUs.
Most libraries, such as Torch and TensorFlow, come with this capability. We will describe how it is
possible to prune a model using Torch. There are many different methods to use for pruning (magnitudebased or mutual information-based). One of the simplest ones to understand and implement is the
L1 pruning method. This method takes the weights of each layer and zeros out the ones with the
lowest L1-norm. You can also specify what percentage of your weights must be converted to zero
after pruning. In order to make this example more understandable and show its impact on the model,
we’ll use the text representation example from Chapter 7. We will prune the model and see how it
performs after pruning:
1.

We will use the Roberta model. You can load the model using the following code:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
distilroberta = SentenceTransformer(
'stsb-distilroberta-base-v2')

Implementation for model size reduction

2.

You will also need to load metrics and datasets for evaluation:
from datasets import load_metric, load_dataset
stsb_metric = load_metric('glue', 'stsb')
stsb = load_dataset('glue', 'stsb')

3.

In order to evaluate the model, just like in Chapter 7, you can use the following function:
import math
import tensorflow as tf
def roberta_sts_benchmark(batch):
    sts_encode1 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        distilroberta.encode(batch['sentence1']),
        axis=1)
    sts_encode2 = tf.nn.l2_normalize(
        distilroberta.encode(batch['sentence2']), axis=1)
    cosine_similarities = tf.reduce_sum(
        tf.multiply(sts_encode1, sts_encode2), axis=1)
    clip_cosine_similarities = tf.clip_by_value(
cosine_similarities,-1.0,1.0)
    scores = 1.0 -\
        tf.acos(clip_cosine_similarities) / math.pi
return scores

4.

And of course, it is required to set labels:
references = stsb['validation'][:]['label']

5.

And then we need to run the base model with no changes in it:
distilroberta_results = \
roberta_sts_benchmark(stsb['validation'])

6.

After all these things are done, this is the step where we start to prune our model:
from torch.nn.utils import prune
pruner = prune.L1Unstructured(amount=0.2)

7.

The previous code makes a pruning object using L1-norm pruning with 20% of the weights in
each layer. To apply it to the model, you can use the following code:
state_dict = distilroberta.state_dict()
for key in state_dict.keys():
    if "weight" in key:
        state_dict[key] = pruner.prune(state_dict[key])

303

304

Working with Efficient Transformers

It will iteratively prune all layers that have weight in their name; in other words, we will prune
all weight layers and not touch the layers that are biased. Of course, you can try that, too, for
experimentation purposes.
8.

And again, it is good to reload the state dictionary to the model:
distilroberta.load_state_dict(state_dict)

9.

Now that we have done everything, we can test the new model:
distilroberta_results_p = \
roberta_sts_benchmark(stsb['validation'])

10. In order to have a good visual representation of the results, you can use the following code:
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame({
"DistilRoberta":stsb_metric.compute(
    predictions=distilroberta_results,
    references=references),
"DistilRobertaPruned":stsb_metric.compute(
    predictions=distilroberta_results_p,
    references=references)
})

The following screenshot shows the results:

Figure 12.2 – Comparison between original and pruned models

We have eliminated 20% of the weights in the model, reduced its size and computation cost, and lost
4% in performance. However, this step can be combined with other techniques, such as quantization,
which is explored in the next subsection.
This type of pruning is applied to some of the weights in a layer; however, it is also possible to completely
drop some parts or layers of transformer architectures. For example, it is possible to drop some of the
attention heads and track the changes too.
There are also other types of pruning algorithms available in PyTorch, such as iterative and global
pruning, which are worth trying.

Implementation for model size reduction

Quantization
Quantization is a signal processing and communication term that is generally used to denote how
much accuracy is presented by the data provided. More bits mean more accuracy and precision in
terms of data resolution. For example, if you have a variable that is presented by 4 bits and you want
to quantize it to 2 bits, it means you have to drop the accuracy of your resolution. With 4 bits, you can
specify 16 different states, while with 2 bits you can distinguish 4 states. In other words, by reducing
the resolution of your data from 4 to 2 bits, you are saving 50% more space and complexity.
Many popular libraries, such as TensorFlow, PyTorch, and MXNET, support mixed-precision operations.
Recall the fp16 parameter used in the TrainingArguments class in Chapter 5. fp16 increases
computational efficiency since modern GPUs provide higher efficiency for reduced precision math,
but the results are accumulated in fp32. Mixed-precision can reduce the memory usage required
for training, which allows us to increase the batch size or model size.
Quantization can be applied to model weights to reduce their resolution and save computation time,
memory, and storage. In this subsection, we will try to quantize the model that we pruned in the
previous section:
1.

In order to do so, you can use the following code to quantize your model in 8-bit integer
representation instead of float:
import torch
distilroberta = torch.quantization.quantize_dynamic(
    model=distilroberta,
    qconfig_spec = {
    torch.nn.Linear : \
torch.quantization.default_dynamic_qconfig,
        },
    dtype=torch.qint8)

2.

Afterwards, you can get the evaluation results by using the following code:
distilroberta_results_pq = \
roberta_sts_benchmark(stsb['validation'])

3.

And as before, you can view the results:
pd.DataFrame({
"DistilRoberta":stsb_metric.compute(
    predictions=distilroberta_results,
    references=references),
"DistillRobertaPruned":stsb_metric.compute(
    predictions=distilroberta_results_p,
    references=references),

305

306

Working with Efficient Transformers

"DistilRobertaPrunedQINT8":stsb_metric.compute(
    predictions=distilroberta_results_pq,
    references=references)
})

The results can be seen as follows:

Figure 12.3 – Comparison between the original, pruned, and quantized models

4.

So far, you have used a distilled model, pruned it, and then quantized it to reduce its size and
complexity. Let’s see how much space you have saved by saving the model:
distilroberta.save("model_pq")

Use the following code in order to see the model size:
ls model_pq/0_Transformer/ -l --block-size=M | grep pytorch_
model.bin
-rw-r--r-- 1 root 191M May 23 14:53 pytorch_model.bin

As you can see, the size is 191 MB. The initial size of the model was 313 MB, which means we managed to
decrease the size of the model to 61% of its original size and just lost 6%–6.5% in terms of performance.
Please note that the block-size parameter may fail on a Mac, and you need to use -lh instead.
Up to this point, you have learned about pruning and quantization in terms of practical model preparation
for industrial usage. However, you also gained information about the distillation process and how it
can be useful. There are many other ways to perform pruning and quantization, which can be a good
step to take in after reading this section. For more information and guides, you can take a look at
movement pruning at https://github.com/huggingface/block_movement_pruning.
This kind of pruning is a simple and deterministic first-order weight pruning approach. It uses the
weight changes in training to find out which weights are more likely to be unused to have less effect
on the result. In the next subsection, we will explore ways to enhance the efficiency of the transformer.

Working with efficient self-attention
Efficient approaches restrict the attention mechanism to get an effective transformer model because the
computational and memory complexity of a transformer is mostly due to the self-attention mechanism.
The attention mechanism scales quadratically with respect to the input sequence length. For short
input, quadratic complexity may not be an issue. However, to process longer documents, we need to
improve the attention mechanism that scales linearly with sequence length.

Working with efficient self-attention

We can roughly group the efficient attention solutions into three types:
• Sparse attention with fixed patterns
• Learnable sparse patterns
• Low-rank factorization/kernel function
Let’s begin with sparse attention based on a fixed pattern next.

Sparse attention with fixed patterns
Recall that the attention mechanism is made up of a query, a key, and values, as roughly formulated here:

Here, the score function, which is usually softmax, performs multiplication that requires O(n2)
memory and computational complexity since a token position attends to all other token positions in
full self-attention mode to build its embeddings. We repeat the same process for all token positions
to get their embeddings, leading to a quadratic complexity problem. It is a very expensive way of
learning, especially for long-context NLP problems. It is natural to ask the question, “Do we need
such a dense interaction, or is there a cheaper way to do the calculations?” Many researchers have
addressed this problem and employed a variety of techniques to mitigate the complexity burden and
reduce the quadratic complexity of the self-attention mechanism. They have mostly made a trade-off
between performance, computation, and memory, especially for long documents.
The simplest way to reduce complexity is to sparsify the full self-attention matrix or find another
cheaper way to approximate full attention. Sparse attention patterns formulate how to connect/
disconnect certain positions without disturbing the flow of information through layers, which helps
the model to track long-term dependency and build sentence-level encoding.
Full self-attention and sparse attention are depicted in Figure 12.4 in that order; the rows correspond
to output positions and the columns are for the inputs. A full self-attention model would directly
transfer the information between any two positions. On the other hand, in localized sliding window
attention, which is sparse attention, as shown on the right of the figure, the empty cells mean that there
is no interaction between the corresponding input-output position. The sparse model in the figure
is based on fixed patterns that are certain manually designed rules. More specifically, it is localized
sliding window attention that was one of the first proposed methods, also known as the local-based
fixed pattern approach. The assumption behind it is that useful information is located in each position
neighbor. Each query token attends to window/2 key tokens to the left and window/2 key tokens
to the right of that position. In the following example, the window size is set to 4. This rule applies
to every layer in the transformer in the same way. In some studies, the window size is increased as it
moves towards the layers further.
The following figure simply depicts the difference between full and sparse attention:

307

308

Working with Efficient Transformers

Figure 12.4 – Full attention versus sparse attention

In sparse mode, the information is transmitted through connected nodes (non-empty cells) in the
model. For example, output position 7 of the sparse attention matrix cannot directly attend to input
position 3 (please see the sparse matrix at the right of Figure 12.4) since cell (7,3) is empty. However,
position 7 indirectly attends to position 3 via the token position 5, that is (7->5, 5->3 => 7->3). The
figure also illustrates that while the full self-attention incurs a total of n2 active cells (vertex), the sparse
model does roughly 5×n.
Another important type is global attention. A few selected tokens or a few injected tokens are used as
global attention that can attend to all other positions and be attended by them. Hence, the maximum
path distance between any two token positions is equal to 2. Suppose we have a sentence [GLB, the,
cat, is, very, sad], where GLB is an injected global token and the window size is 2, which means a
token can attend to only its immediate left and right tokens and to GLB as well. There is no direct
interaction between cat and sad. But we can follow cat-> GLB, GLB-> sad interactions, which creates
a hyperlink through the GLB token. The global tokens can be selected from existing tokens or added
tokens such as (CLS). As shown in the following screenshot, the first two token positions are selected
as global tokens:

Working with efficient self-attention

Figure 12.5 – Global attention

These global tokens don’t have to be at the beginning of the sentence either. For example, the Longformer
model randomly selects global tokens in addition to the first two tokens.
There are four more widely seen patterns. Random attention (the first matrix in Figure 12.6) is used
to ease the flow of information by randomly selecting from existing tokens. But most of the time, we
employ random attention as part of a combined pattern (the bottom-left matrix) that consists of a
combination of other models. Dilated attention is similar to the sliding window, but some gaps are
put in the window, as shown at the top right of Figure 12.6:

309

310

Working with Efficient Transformers

Figure 12.6 – Random, Dilated, Combined, and Blockwise

The Blockwise Pattern (the bottom right of Figure 12.6) provides a basis for other patterns. It chunks
the tokens into a fixed number of blocks, which is especially useful for long-context problems. For
example, when a 4,096x4,096 attention matrix is chunked using a block size of 512, then 8 (512x512)
query blocks and key blocks are obtained. Many efficient models, such as BigBird and Reformer,
chunk tokens into blocks to reduce the complexity.
It is important to note that the proposed patterns must be supported by accelerators and libraries. Some
attention patterns, such as dilated patterns, require a special matrix multiplication that is not directly
supported in current deep learning libraries such as PyTorch or TensorFlow as of writing this chapter.
We are ready to run some experiments for efficient transformers. We will proceed with models that
are supported by the Transformers library and that have checkpoints on the Hugging Face platform.
Longformer is one of the models that uses sparse attention. It uses a combination of a sliding window
and global attention. It supports dilated sliding window attention as well.

Working with efficient self-attention

Before we start, we need to install the py3nvml package for benchmarking. Please recall that we
already discussed how to apply benchmarking in Chapter 2:
!pip install py3nvml

We also need to check our devices to ensure that there is no running process (within Jupyter Notebook):
!nvidia-smi

The output is as follows:

Figure 12.7 – GPU usage

Currently, Longformer authors have shared a couple of checkpoints. The following code snippet loads
the Longformer checkpoint allenai/longformer-base-4096 and processes a long text:
from transformers import (
    LongformerTokenizer, LongformerForSequenceClassification)
import torch
tokenizer = LongformerTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    'allenai/longformer-base-4096')
model=LongformerForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    'allenai/longformer-base-4096')
sequence= "hello "*4093
inputs = tokenizer(sequence, return_tensors="pt")
print("input shape: ",inputs.input_ids.shape)
outputs = model(**inputs)

311

312

Working with Efficient Transformers

The output is as follows:
input shape:  torch.Size([1, 4096])

As seen, Longformer can process a sequence with a length of up to 4096. When we pass a sequence
whose length is more than 4096, which is the limit, you will get the error IndexError: index
out of range in self.
Longformer’s default attention_window is 512, which is the size of the attention window around
each token. With the following code, we instantiate two Longformer configuration objects, where the
first one is the default Longformer, and the second is a lighter one where we set the window size to a
smaller value such as 4 so that the model becomes lighter:
Please pay attention to the following examples. We will always call XformerConfig.from_
pretrained(). This call does not download the actual weights of the model checkpoint, but instead
only downloads the configuration from the Hugging Face Hub. Throughout this section, since we will
not fine-tune, we only need the configuration:
from transformers import (LongformerConfig,
PyTorchBenchmark, PyTorchBenchmarkArguments)
config_longformer=LongformerConfig.from_pretrained(
    "allenai/longformer-base-4096")
config_longformer_window4=LongformerConfig.from_pretrained(
    "allenai/longformer-base-4096",
     attention_window=4)

With these configuration instances, you can train your Longformer language model with your own
datasets, passing the configuration object to the Longformer model as follows:
from transformers import LongformerModel
model = LongformerModel(config_longformer)

Other than training a Longformer model, you can also fine-tune a trained checkpoint to a downstream
task. To do so, you can continue by applying the code as shown in Chapter 3 for language model
training and Chapters 5 and 6 for fine-tuning.
We will now compare the time and memory performance of these two configurations with various
lengths of input [128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096] by utilizing PyTorchBenchmark
as follows:
sequence_lengths=[128,256,512,1024,2048,4096]
models=["config_longformer","config_longformer_window4"]
configs=[eval(m) for m in models]
benchmark_args = PyTorchBenchmarkArguments(
    sequence_lengths= sequence_lengths,
    batch_sizes=[1],

Working with efficient self-attention

    models= models)
benchmark = PyTorchBenchmark(
    configs=configs,
    args=benchmark_args)
results = benchmark.run()

The output is the following:

Figure 12.8 – Benchmark results

313

314

Working with Efficient Transformers

Some hints for PyTorchBenchmarkArguments: if you like to see the performance for training
as well as inference, you should set the argument training to True (the default is False).
You may also want to see information about your current environment. You can do so by setting
no_env_print to False; the default is True.
Let’s visualize the performance to make it more interpretable. To do so, we define a plotMe() function
since we will need that function for further experiments as well. The function plots the inference
performance in terms of both running time complexity and memory complexity.
Here is the function definition:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
def plotMe(results,title="Time"):
    plt.figure(figsize=(8,8))
    fmts= ["rs--","go--","b+-","c-o"]
    q=results.memory_inference_result
    if title=="Time":
        q=results.time_inference_result
    models=list(q.keys())
    seq=list(q[models[0]]['result'][1].keys())
    models_perf=[list(q[m]['result'][1].values()) \
        for m in models]
    plt.xlabel('Sequence Length')
    plt.ylabel(title)
    plt.title('Inference Result')
    for perf,fmt in zip(models_perf,fmts):
        plt.plot(seq, perf,fmt)
    plt.legend(models)
    plt.show()

Let’s see the computational performance of two Longformer configurations, as follows:
plotMe(results)

It plots the following:

Working with efficient self-attention

Figure 12.9 – Speed performance over sequence length (Longformer)

In this and the next examples, we see the main differentiation between a heavy model and a light
model starting from length 512. The preceding figure shows the lighter Longformer model in green
(the one with a window length of 4) performs better in terms of time complexity as expected. We also
see that two Longformer models process the input with linear time complexity.
Let’s evaluate these two models in terms of memory performance:
plotMe(results, "Memory")

315

316

Working with Efficient Transformers

It plots the following:

Figure 12.10 – Memory performance over sequence length (Longformer)

Again, up to length 512, there is no substantial differentiation. For the rest, we see a similar memory
performance to the time performance. It is clear to say that the memory complexity of the Longformer
self-attention is linear. On the other hand, we are not saying anything about model task performance yet.
Thanks to the PyTorchBenchmark script, we have cross-checked these models. This script is very
useful when we choose which configuration the language model should be trained with. It will be
vital before starting the real language model training and fine-tuning.

Working with efficient self-attention

Another best-performing model exploiting sparse attention is BigBird (Zohen et al. 2020). The authors
claimed that their sparse attention mechanism (they called it a generalized attention mechanism)
preserves all the functionality of the full self-attention mechanism of vanilla transformers in linear
time. The authors treat the attention matrix as a directed graph so that they can leverage graph theory
algorithms. They took inspiration from the graph sparsification algorithm, which approximates a given
graph G by graph G' with fewer edges or vertices.
BigBird is a block-wise attention model and can handle sequences up to a length of 4096. It first
blocks the attention pattern by packing queries and keys together and then defines attention on these
blocks. They utilize random, sliding window, and global attention.
Let’s load and use BigBird model checkpoint configuration just like the Longformer transformer model.
A couple of BigBird checkpoints are shared by the developers in the Hugging Face Hub. We will select
the original BigBird model, google/bigbird-roberta-base, which is based on a RoBERTa
checkpoint. Once again, we’re not downloading the model checkpoint weights, but the configuration
instead. The BigBirdConfig implementation allows us to compare full self-attention and sparse
attention. Thus, we can check whether the sparsification will reduce the full-attention O(n2) complexity
to a lower level. Once again, up to a length of 512, we do not clearly observe quadratic complexity. We
can see the complexity from this level on. Setting the attention type to original_full will give
us a full self-attention model. For comparison, we created two types of configurations: the first one is
BigBird’s original sparse approach and the second is a model that uses the full self-attention model.
We call them sparseBird and fullBird, as follows:
from transformers import BigBirdConfig
# Default Bird with num_random_blocks=3, block_size=64
sparseBird = BigBirdConfig.from_pretrained(
    "google/bigbird-roberta-base")
fullBird = BigBirdConfig.from_pretrained(
    "google/bigbird-roberta-base",
    attention_type="original_full")

Please notice that for smaller sequence lengths up to 512, the BigBird model works as full self-attention
mode due to block-size and sequence-length inconsistency:
sequence_lengths=[256,512,1024,2048, 3072, 4096]
models=["sparseBird","fullBird"]
configs=[eval(m) for m in models]
benchmark_args = PyTorchBenchmarkArguments(
    sequence_lengths=sequence_lengths,
    batch_sizes=[1],
    models=models)

317

318

Working with Efficient Transformers

benchmark = PyTorchBenchmark(
    configs=configs,
    args=benchmark_args)
results = benchmark.run()

The output is as follows:

Figure 12.11 – Benchmark results (BigBird)

Again, we plot the time performance as follows:
plotMe(results)

Working with efficient self-attention

It plots the following:

Figure 12.12 – Speed performance (BigBird)

To a certain extent, the full self-attention model performs better than a sparse model. However, we
can observe the quadratic time complexity for fullBird. Hence, after a certain point, we also see
that the sparse attention model abruptly outperforms it, when coming to an end.
Let’s check the memory complexity as follows:
plotMe(results,"Memory")

319

320

Working with Efficient Transformers

Here is the output:

Figure 12.13 – Memory performance (BigBird)

In the preceding figure, we can clearly see linear and quadratic memory complexity. Once again, up
to a certain point (a length of 2,000 in this example), we cannot make a clear distinction.
Next, let’s discuss learnable patterns and work with models that can process longer input.

Working with efficient self-attention

Learnable patterns
Learning-based patterns are the alternatives to fixed (predefined) patterns. These approaches extract
the patterns in an unsupervised data-driven fashion. They leverage some techniques to measure
the similarity between the queries and the keys to properly cluster them. This transformer family
learns first how to cluster the tokens and then restrict the interaction to get an optimum view of the
attention matrix.
Now, we will do some experiments with Reformer as one of the important efficient models based on
learnable patterns. Before that, let’s address what the Reformer model contributes to the NLP field.
It employs Local Self Attention (LSA) that cuts the input into n chunks to reduce the complexity
bottleneck. But this cutting process makes the boundary token unable to attend to its immediate
neighbors. For example, in the chunks [a,b,c] and [d,e,f], the token d cannot attend to its
immediate context c. As a remedy, Reformer augments each chunk with the parameters that control
the number of previous neighboring chunks.
The most important contribution of Reformer is to leverage the Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)
function, which assigns the same value to similar query vectors. Attention could be approximated by
only comparing the most similar vectors, which helps us reduce the dimensionality and then sparsify
the matrix. It is a safe operation since the softmax function is highly dominated by large values
and can ignore dissimilar vectors. Additionally, instead of finding the relevant keys for a given query,
only similar queries are found and clustered. That is, the position of a query can only attend to the
positions of other queries to which it has a high cosine similarity.
To reduce the memory footprint, Reformer model uses reversible residual layers. It does not need to store
the activations of all the layers. Because, the activations of any layer can be recovered from the activation
of the following layer. A similar idea has been applied in Reversible Residual Network (RevNet).
It is important to note that the Reformer model and many other efficient transformers are criticized
because, in practice, they are only more efficient than the vanilla transformer when the input length is
very long (Efficient Transformers: A Survey, Yi Tay, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Donald Metzler). We
made similar observations in our earlier experiments (please see the BigBird and Longformer experiment).
Now we will conduct some experiments with Reformer. Thanks to the Hugging Face platform, the
Transformers library provides us with Reformer implementation and its pre-trained checkpoints.
We will load the configuration of the original checkpoint, google/reformer-enwik8, and also
tweak some settings to work in full self-attention mode. When we set lsh_attn_chunk_length
and local_attn_chunk_length to 16384, which is the maximum length that Reformer can

321

322

Working with Efficient Transformers

process, the Reformer instance will have no chance of local optimization and will automatically work
like a vanilla transformer with full attention. We call it fullReformer. As for the original Reformer,
we instantiate it with default parameters from the original checkpoint and call it sparseReformer
as follows:
from transformers import ReformerConfig
fullReformer = ReformerConfig\
    .from_pretrained("google/reformer-enwik8",
        lsh_attn_chunk_length=16384,
        local_attn_chunk_length=16384)
sparseReformer = ReformerConfig\
    .from_pretrained("google/reformer-enwik8")
sequence_lengths=[256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 12000]
models=["fullReformer","sparseReformer"]
configs=[eval(e) for e in models]

Please note that the Reformer model can process sequences up to a length of 16384. But for the full
self-attention mode, due to the accelerator capacity of our environment, the attention matrix does not
fit on GPU, and we get a CUDA out of memory warning. Hence, we set the max length as 12000. If
your environment is suitable, you can increase it.
Let’s run the benchmark experiments as follows:
benchmark_args = PyTorchBenchmarkArguments(
    sequence_lengths=sequence_lengths,
    batch_sizes=[1],
    models=models)
benchmark = PyTorchBenchmark(
    configs=configs,
    args=benchmark_args)
result = benchmark.run()

Working with efficient self-attention

The output is as follows:

Figure 12.14 – Benchmark results

Let’s visualize the time performance result as follows:
plotMe(result)

323

324

Working with Efficient Transformers

The output is the following:

Figure 12.15 – Speed performance (Reformer)

We can see the linear and quadratic complexity of the models. We observe similar characteristics for
the memory footprint by running the following line:
plotMe(result,"Memory Footprint")

It plots the following:

Working with efficient self-attention

Figure 12.16 – Memory usage (Reformer)

Just as expected, Reformer with sparse attention produces a lightweight model. However, as mentioned
before, we have difficulty observing the quadratic/linear complexity up to a certain length. As all these
experiments indicate, efficient transformers can mitigate the time and memory complexity for longer
text. What about task performance? How accurate would they be for classification or summarization
tasks? To answer this, we will either start an experiment or have a look at the performance reports in the
paper on Reformer model. For the experiment, you can repeat the code in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 by
instantiating an efficient model instead of a vanilla transformer. And you can track model performance
and optimize it by using model tracking tools that we will discuss in detail in Chapter 15.
Let’s take a look alternative types of efficient transformers, in addition to sparsification.

325

326

Working with Efficient Transformers

Low-rank factorization, kernel methods, and other approaches
The latest trend of the efficient model is to leverage low-rank approximations of the full self-attention
matrix. These models are considered to be the lightest since they can reduce the self-attention
complexity from O(n2) to O(n) in both computational time and memory footprint. Choosing a very
small projection dimension k, such that k << n, then the memory and space complexity is highly
reduced. Linformer and Synthesizer are the models that efficiently approximate the full attention with
a low-rank factorization. They decompose the dot-product N×N attention of the original transformer
through linear projections.
Kernel attention is another method family that we have seen lately to improve efficiency by viewing
the attention mechanism through kernelization. A kernel is a function that takes two vectors as
arguments and returns the product of their projection with a feature map. It enables us to operate
in high-dimensional feature space without even computing the coordinates of the data in that highdimensional space, because computations within that space become more expensive. This is when
the kernel trick comes into play. The efficient models based on kernelization enable us to re-write
the self-attention mechanism to prevent the explicit computation of the N×N matrix. In the realm
of machine learning, the algorithm that frequently employs the kernel trick is the Support Vector
Machines. This is where kernels such as the radial basis function or the polynomial kernel come into
play, particularly when dealing with nonlinearity. For transformers, the most notable examples are
Performer and Linear Transformers.

Easier quantization using bitsandbytes
Although quantization provides smaller models with reducing the accuracy, it is always important
to use GPU friendly functions to get the most out of it. One of very useful libraries that implements
NVidia CUDA custom functions for this specific use case (8-bit quantization) is bitsandbytes.
Hugging face’s Transformers library also integrated this functionality for easier use. All you must do
is to first change your runtime to GPU and then install bitsandbytes and accelerator:
pip install bitsandbytes
pip install accelerate

And then you can easily load any model you want using 8-bit quantization:
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    'decapoda-research/llama-7b-hf',
    load_in_8bit=True)

Summary

As you can see, using the quantization with transformers is very easy; just setting load_in_8bit
to True will do the job.
This is a useful technique for loading big models on machines with low memory and low computation
power. However, it should be taken into consideration that this will decrease the model accuracy as well.

Summary
In this chapter, we have learned how to mitigate the burden of running large models with limited
computational capacity. We first discussed how to make efficient models out of trained models using
distillation, pruning, and quantization. It is important to pre-train a small general-purpose language
model such as DistilBERT. This light model can then be fine-tuned with good performance on a wide
variety of problems compared to their non-distilled counterparts.
Second, we have learned about efficient sparse transformers that replace the full self-attention matrix
with a sparse one using approximation techniques such as Linformer, BigBird, and Performer. We
have seen how they perform on various benchmarks, such as computational complexity and memory
complexity. The examples showed us that these approaches can reduce quadratic complexity to linear
complexity without sacrificing performance.
As we gather more data over time, we aim for our models to operate more quickly. In this regard,
efficient transformers play a crucial role.
In the next chapter, we will discuss how to work with multiple languages.

References
• Sanh, V., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., & Wolf, T. (2019). DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT:
smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108.
• Choromanski, K., Likhosherstov, V., Dohan, D., Song, X., Gane, A., Sarlos, T., & Weller, A.
(2020). Rethinking attention with performers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14794.
• Wang, S., Li, B., Khabsa, M., Fang, H., & Ma, H. (2020). Linformer: Self-attention with linear
complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768.
• Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, A., Ainslie, J., Alberti, C., Ontanon, S., ... & Ahmed, A.
(2020). Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.14062.
• Tay, Y., Dehghani, M., Bahri, D., & Metzler, D. (2020). Efficient transformers: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.06732.

327

328

Working with Efficient Transformers

• Tay, Y., Bahri, D., Metzler, D., Juan, D. C., Zhao, Z., & Zheng, C. (2020). Synthesizer: Rethinking
self-attention in transformer models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00743.
• Kitaev, N., Kaiser, Ł., & Levskaya, A. (2020). Reformer: The efficient transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.04451.
• Fournier, Q., Caron, G. M., & Aloise, D. (2021). A Practical Survey on Faster and Lighter
Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14636.

13
Cross-Lingual and Multilingual
Language Modeling
Up to this point, you have learned a lot about transformer-based architectures, from encoder-only
models to decoder-only models and from efficient transformers to long-context transformers. You
also learned about semantic text representation based on a Siamese network. However, we discussed
all these models in terms of monolingual problems. We assumed that these models just understand
a single language and are not capable of having a general understanding of text, regardless of the
language itself. In fact, some of these models have multilingual variants: multilingual bidirectional
encoder representations from transformers (mBERT), multilingual text-to-text transfer transformer
(mT5), and multilingual bidirectional and auto-regressive transformer (mBART), to name but a few.
On the other hand, some models are specifically designed for multilingual purposes and are trained
with cross-lingual objectives. For example, cross-lingual language model (XLM) is such a method,
and this will be described in detail in this chapter.
In this chapter, the concept of knowledge sharing between languages will be presented, and the impact
of byte-pair encoding (BPE) on the tokenization part will also be covered in order to achieve better
input. Cross-lingual sentence similarity using the Cross-Lingual Natural Language Inference (XNLI)
corpus will be detailed. Tasks such as cross-lingual classification and the utilization of cross-lingual
sentence representation for training on one language and testing on another one will be presented
by giving concrete examples of real-life problems in natural language processing (NLP), such as
multilingual intent classification.
Massive multilingual translation is also another important part of this chapter. Multilingual models,
such as mBART and M2M100, can perform translation tasks in a massive number of languages as well.
In short, you will learn the following topics in this chapter:
• Translation language modeling and cross-lingual knowledge sharing
• XLM and mBERT
• Cross-lingual similarity tasks

330

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

• Cross-lingual classification
• Cross-lingual zero-shot learning
• Massive multilingual translation

Technical requirements
The code for this chapter is found in the repo at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/
Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition, which is in the GitHub repository for this
book. We will be using Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises that require Python 3.6.0+,
and the following packages will need to be installed:
• tensorflow
• pytorch
• transformers >=4.00
• datasets
• sentence-transformers
• umap-learn
• openpyxl

Translation language modeling and cross-lingual
knowledge sharing
So far, you have learned about masked language modeling (MLM) as a cloze task. However, language
modeling using neural networks is divided into three categories based on the approach itself and its
practical usage, as follows:
• MLM
• Causal language modeling (CLM)
• Translation language modeling (TLM)
It is also important to note that there are other pretraining approaches, such as next-sentence prediction
(NSP) and sentence order prediction (SOP), but we only consider token-based language modeling.
These three are the main approaches that are used in the literature. MLM, which is described and
detailed in previous chapters, is a very close concept to a cloze task in language learning.

Translation language modeling and cross-lingual knowledge sharing

CLM is defined by predicting the next token, which is followed by some previous tokens. For example,
if you see the following context, you can easily predict the next token:
<s> Transformers changed the natural language …

As you see, only the last token is masked, and the previous tokens are given to the model to predict the
last one. This token would be processing, and if the context with this token is given to you again, you
might end it with an “</s>” token. In order to have good training in this approach, it is required not
to mask the first token because the model would have just a sentence start token to make a sentence
out of it. This sentence can be anything! Here’s an example:
<s> …

What would you predict from this? It can be literally anything. To obtain better training and better
results, it is required to give at least the first token, such as this:
<s> Transformers …

The model is required to predict change; after giving it Transformers changed ..., it is required to predict
the, and so on. This approach is very similar to N-grams and long-short-term memory (LSTM)-based
approaches because it is left-to-right modeling based on the probability P(wn|wn-1, wn-2 ,…,w0),
where wn is the token to be predicted, and the rest represents the tokens before it. The token with the
maximum probability is the predicted one.
These are the objectives used for monolingual models. So, what can be done for cross-lingual models?
The answer is TLM, which is very similar to MLM, with a few changes. Instead of giving a sentence
from a single language, a sentence pair is given to a model in different languages, separated by a
special token. The model is required to predict the masked tokens, which are randomly masked in
any of these languages.
The following sentence pair is an example of such a task:

Figure 13.1 – Cross-lingual relation example between Turkish and English

Given these two masked sentences, the model is required to predict the missing tokens. In this task,
on some occasions, the model has access to the tokens (for example, doğal and language, respectively,
in the sentence pair in Figure 13.1) that are missing from one of the languages in the pair.

331

332

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

As another example, you can see the same pair in the Persian and Turkish sentences. In the second
sentence, the değiştirdiler token can be attended by multiple tokens (one is masked) in the first sentence.
In the following example, the word �‫تغی‬
is missing, but the meaning of değiştirdiler is ‫تغی� دادند‬:
‫ی‬
‫ی‬

Figure 13.2 – Cross-lingual relation example between Persian and Turkish

Accordingly, a model can learn the mapping between these meanings. Just as with a translation model,
our TLM must also learn these complexities between languages because machine translation (MT)
is more than a token-to-token mapping.
So far, we learned how cross-lingual models can learn via translation language modeling. In the next
part, two of the well-known models in this field will be explained further.

XLM and mBERT
In this section, we will delve into the explanation of two models: mBERT and XLM. The rationale
behind choosing these models lies in their representation as the foremost examples of multilingual
models; mBERT is a multilingual model trained on a different corpus of various languages using
MLM modeling. It can operate separately for many languages. On the other hand, XLM is trained on
different corpora using MLM, CLM, and TLM language modeling, and it can solve cross-lingual tasks.
For instance, it can measure the similarity of the sentences in two different languages by mapping
them in a common vector space, which is not possible with mBERT.

mBERT
You are familiar with the BERT autoencoder model from Chapter 3, and how to train it using MLM
on a specified corpus. Imagine a case where a wide and huge corpus is provided not from a single
language but from 104 languages instead. Training on such a corpus would result in a multilingual
version of BERT. However, training using such a wide variety of languages would increase the model
size, and this is inevitable in the case of BERT. The vocabulary size would be increased, and accordingly,
the size of the embedding layer would be larger because of more vocabulary.

XLM and mBERT

Compared to a monolingual pretrained BERT, this new version is capable of handling multiple
languages inside a single model. However, the downside of this kind of modeling is that this model is
not capable of mapping between languages. This means that the model, in the pretraining phase, does
not learn anything about these mappings between the semantic meanings of the tokens from different
languages. In order to provide cross-lingual mapping and understanding for this model, it is necessary
to train it on some of the cross-lingual supervised tasks, such as those available in the XNLI dataset.
Using this model is as easy as working with the models you have used in the previous chapters (see
https://huggingface.co/bert-base-multilingual-uncased for more details).
Here’s the code you’ll need to get started:
from transformers import pipeline
unmasker = pipeline('fill-mask', model='bert-base    multilingual-uncased')
sentences = [
    "Transformers changed the [MASK] language processing",
    "Transformerlar [MASK] dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler",
    "‫[ ترنسفرمرها پردازش زبان‬MASK] ‫تغی� دادند‬
‫"را ی‬
]
for sentence in sentences:
    print(sentence)
    print(unmasker(sentence)[0]["sequence"])
    print("="*50)

T﻿he output will then be presented, as shown in the following code snippet:
Transformers changed the [MASK] language processing
transformers changed the english language processing
==================================================
Transformerlar [MASK] dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler
transformerlar bu dil islemeyi degistirdiler
==================================================
‫[ ترنسفرمرها پردازش زبان‬MASK] ‫تغی� دادند‬
‫را ی‬
‫ن‬
‫تغی� دادند‬
‫ترنسفرمرها پردازش زبا� را ی‬
==================================================

As you can see, it can perform fill-mask for various languages.

XLM
The cross-lingual pretraining of language models, such as that shown with an XLM approach, is
based on three different pretraining objectives. MLM, CLM, and TLM are used to pretrain the XLM
model. The sequential order of this pretraining is performed using a shared BPE tokenizer between
all languages. The reason that tokens are shared is that the shared tokens provide fewer tokens in

333

334

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

the case of languages that have similar tokens or subwords, and, on the other hand, these tokens can
provide shared semantics in the pretraining process. For example, some tokens have remarkably similar
writing and meaning across many languages, and accordingly, these tokens are shared by BPE for all. In
addition, some tokens that are spelled the same in different languages can have different meanings—for
example, “was” is shared in German and English contexts. Luckily, self-attention mechanisms help us
to disambiguate the meaning of “was” using the surrounding context.
Another major improvement of this cross-lingual modeling is that it is also pretrained on CLM, which
makes it more reasonable for inferences where sentence prediction or completion is required. In other
words, this model has an understanding of the languages and is capable of completing sentences,
predicting missing tokens, and predicting missing tokens by using other language sources.
The following diagram shows the overall structure of cross-lingual modeling. You can read more
at https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.07291.pdf:

Figure 13.3 – MLM and TLM pretraining for cross-lingual modeling

A newer version of the XLM model was also released: XLM-R, which has minor changes in the training
and corpus used. XLM-R is identical to the XLM model but is trained on more languages and a much
bigger corpus. The CommonCrawl and Wikipedia corpus are aggregated, and the XLM-R is trained
for MLM on this. However, the XNLI dataset is also used for TLM. The following diagram shows the
amount of data used by XLM-R pretraining:

XLM and mBERT

Figure 13.4 – Amount of data in gigabytes (GB) (log-scale)

There are many upsides and downsides when adding new languages for training data; for example,
adding new languages may not always improve the overall model of natural language inference (NLI).
The XNLI dataset is usually used for multilingual and cross-lingual NLI. From previous chapters, we
have seen the Multi-Genre NLI (MNLI) dataset for English; the XNLI dataset is almost identical to
it but has more languages, and it also has sentence pairs. However, training only on this task is not
enough, and it will not cover TLM pretraining. For TLM pretraining, much broader datasets, such as
the parallel corpus of OPUS (short for Open Source Parallel Corpus), are used. This dataset contains
subtitles from different languages, which are aligned and cleaned, with the translations provided by
many software sources such as Ubuntu.
The following screenshot shows OPUS (https://opus.nlpl.eu/trac/) and its components
for searching and getting information about the dataset:

Figure 13.5 – An overview of OPUS

335

336

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

The steps for using cross-lingual models are described here:
1.

Simple changes to the previous code can show you how XLM-R performs mask filling. First,
you must change the model as follows:
unmasker = pipeline('fill-mask', model='xlm-roberta-base')

2.

Afterward, you need to change the mask token from [MASK] to <mask>, which is a special
token for XLM-R (or simply call tokenizer.mask_token). Here’s the code to accomplish this:
sentences = [
"Transformers changed the <mask> language processing",
"Transformerlar <mask> dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler",
"‫< ترنسفرمرها پردازش زبان‬mask" ‫تغی� دادند‬
‫را ی‬
]

3.

Then, you can run the same code as follows:
for sentence in sentences:
    print(sentence)
    print(unmasker(sentence)[0]["sequence"])
    print("="*50)

4.

The results will appear:
Transformers changed the <mask> language processing
Transformers changed the human language processing
==================================================
Transformerlar <mask> dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler
Transformerlar, dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler
================================================== ‫ترنسفرمرها پردازش‬
‫[ زبان‬MASK] ‫تغی� دادند‬
‫را ی‬
‫ترنسفرمرها پردازش ن‬
‫تغی� دادند‬
‫ا‬
‫ر‬
�‫زبا‬
‫ی‬
==================================================

5.

However, as you can see from the Turkish and Persian examples, the model still made mistakes;
for example, in the Persian text, it just added ‫ی‬, and in the Turkish version, it added ,. For
the English sentence, it added human, which is not what was expected. The sentences are not
wrong, but they are not what we expected. However, this time, we have a cross-lingual model
that is trained using TLM, so let’s use it by concatenating two sentences and giving the model
some extra hints. Here we go:
print(unmasker("Transformers changed the natural language
processing. </s> Transformerlar <mask> dil işlemeyi
değiştirdiler.")[0]["sequence"])

Cross-lingual similarity tasks

6.

The results will be shown as follows:
Transformers changed the natural language processing.
Transformerlar doğal dil işlemeyi değiştirdiler.

7.

That’s it! The model has now made the right choice. Let’s play with it a bit more and see how
it performs:
‫ین‬
print(unmasker("Earth is a great place to live in. </s> ‫زم� جای‬
‫خو� برای‬
<mask>
0[)".‫است‬
‫"[]کردن‬sequence"])
‫ب‬

Here is the result:

‫گ‬
‫ین‬
Earth is a great place to live in. ‫خو� برای زند� کردن است‬
‫زم� جای ب‬.

Well done! So far, you have learned about multilingual and cross-lingual models such as mBERT and
XLM. In the next section, you will learn how to use such models for multilingual text similarity. You
will also see some use cases, such as multilingual plagiarism detection.

Cross-lingual similarity tasks
Cross-lingual models are capable of representing text in a unified form, where sentences are taken
from different languages but those with close meaning are mapped to similar vectors in vector space.
XLM-R, as was detailed in the previous section, is one of the successful models in this scope. Now,
let’s look at some applications of this.

Cross-lingual text similarity
In the following example, you will see how it is possible to use a cross-lingual language model
pre-trained on the XNLI dataset to find similar texts from different languages. A use-case scenario
is where a plagiarism detection system is required for this task. We will use sentences from the
Azerbaijani language and see whether XLM-R finds similar sentences from English—if there are any.
The sentences from both languages are identical. Here are the steps to take:
1.

First, you need to load a model for this task as follows:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer, util
model = SentenceTransformer("stsb-xlm-r-multilingual")

2.

Afterward, we assume that we have sentences ready in the form of two separate lists, as illustrated
in the following code snippet:
azeri_sentences = ['Pişik çöldə oturur',
    'Bir adam gitara çalır',
    'Mən makaron sevirəm',
    'Yeni film möhtəşəmdir',
    'Pişik bağda oynayır',

337

338

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

    'Bir qadın televizora baxır',
    'Yeni film çox möhtəşəmdir',
    'Pizzanı sevirsən?']
english_sentences = ['The cat sits outside',
    'A man is playing guitar',
    'I love pasta',
    'The new movie is awesome',
    'The cat plays in the garden',
    'A woman watches TV',
    'The new movie is so great',
    'Do you like pizza?']

3.

The next step is to represent these sentences in vector space by using the XLM-R model. You
can do this by simply using the encode function of the model as follows:
azeri_representation = model.encode(azeri_sentences)
english_representation = model.encode(english_sentences)

4.

In the final step, we will search for semantically similar sentences of the first language against
the other language’s representations as follows:
results = []
for azeri_sentence, query in zip(azeri_sentences,
azeri_representation):
    id_, score = util.semantic_search(
        query,english_representation)[0][0].values()
    results.append({
        "azeri": azeri_sentence,
        "english": english_sentences[id_],
        "score": round(score, 4)
    })

5.

In order to see a clear form of these results, you can use a pandas DataFrame, as follows:
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame(results)

You will see the results with their matching score as follows:

Cross-lingual similarity tasks

Figure 13.6 – Plagiarism detection results (XLM-R)

The model made mistakes in one case (row number 4) if we accept the maximum scored sentence to
be paraphrased or translated, but it is useful to have a threshold and accept values higher than it. We
will show more comprehensive experimentation in the following sections.
On the other hand, alternative bi-encoders are available, too. Such approaches provide a pair encoding
of two sentences and classify the result to train the model. In such cases, language-agnostic bert sentence
embedding (LaBSE) may be a good choice, too, and it is available in the sentence-transformers library
and in TensorFlow Hub, too. LaBSE is a dual encoder based on transformers, which is similar to
Sentence-BERT, where two encoders that have the same parameters are combined with a loss function
based on the dual similarity of two sentences.
Using the same example, you can change the model to LaBSE in a very simple way and rerun the
previous code (Step 1), as follows:
model = SentenceTransformer("LaBSE")

The results are shown in the following screenshot:

339

340

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

Figure 13.7 – Plagiarism detection results (LaBSE)

As you see, LaBSE performs better in this case, and the result in row number 4 is correct this time.
LaBSE authors claim that it works very well in finding translations of sentences, but it is not so good at
finding sentences that are not completely identical. For this purpose, it is a very useful tool for finding
plagiarism in cases where a translation is used to steal intellectual material. However, there are many
other factors that change the results, too—for example, the resource size for the pre-trained model in
each language and the nature of the language pairs is also important. For a reasonable comparison,
we need a more comprehensive experiment, and we should consider many factors.

Visualizing cross-lingual textual similarity
Now, we will measure and visualize the degree of textual similarity between two sentences, one of
which is a translation of the other. Tatoeba is a free collection of such sentences and translations, and
it is part of the XTREME benchmark. The community aims to obtain high-quality sentence translation
with the support of many participants. We’ll now take the following steps:
1.

We will take Russian and English sentences out of this collection. Make sure the following
libraries are installed before you start working:
!pip install sentence_transformers datasets transformers umaplearn

2.

Load the sentence pairs as follows:
from datasets import load_dataset
import pandas as pd
data=load_dataset("xtreme","tatoeba.rus",
    split="validation")
pd.DataFrame(data)[["source_sentence","target_sentence"]]

Cross-lingual similarity tasks

3.

Let’s look at the output:

Figure 13.8 – Russian–English sentence pairs

4.

First, we will take the first K=30 sentence pairs for visualization, and later, we will run an
experiment for the entire set. Now, we will encode them with the sentence transformers that
we already used for the previous example. Here is the execution of the code:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
model = SentenceTransformer("stsb-xlm-r-multilingual")
K=30
q=data["source_sentence"][:K] + data["target_sentence"][:K]
emb=model.encode(q)
len(emb), len(emb[0])
Output: (60, 768)

5.

We now have 60 vectors of length 768. We will reduce the dimensionality to 2 by using uniform
manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), which we have already encountered in
previous chapters. We visualized sentences that are translations of each other, marking them
with the same color and code. We also drew a dashed line between them to make the link more
obvious. The code is illustrated in the following snippet:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import numpy as np
import umap
import pylab

341

342

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

X= umap.UMAP(n_components=2, random_state=42).fit_transform(emb)
    idx= np.arange(len(emb))
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(12, 12))
ax.set_facecolor('whitesmoke')
cm = pylab.get_cmap("prism")
colors = list(cm(1.0*i/K) for i in range(K))
for i in idx:
    if i<K:
        ax.annotate("RUS-"+str(i), # text
            (X[i,0], X[i,1]), # coordinates
            c=colors[i]) # color
        ax.plot((X[i,0],X[i+K,0]),(X[i,1],X[i+K,1]),"k:")
    else:
        ax.annotate("EN-"+str(i%K),
            (X[i,0], X[i,1]),
            c=colors[i%K])

6.

Here is the output of the preceding code:

Figure 13.9 – An overview of Russian–English sentence similarity visualization

Cross-lingual similarity tasks

As we expected, most sentence pairs are located close to each other. Inevitably, certain pairs
(such as id 12) insist on not being close.
7.

For a comprehensive analysis, let’s now measure the entire dataset. We encode all of the source
and target sentences—1K pairs—as follows:
source_emb=model.encode(data["source_sentence"])
target_emb=model.encode(data["target_sentence"])

8.

We calculate the cosine similarity between all pairs, save them in the sims variable, and plot
a histogram as follows:
from scipy import spatial
sims=[ 1 - spatial.distance.cosine(s,t) \
    for s,t in zip(source_emb, target_emb)]
plt.hist(sims, bins=100, range=(0.8,1))
plt.show()

9.

Here is the output:

Figure 13.10 – Similarity histogram for the English and Russian sentence pairs

10. As can be seen, the scores are very close to 1. This is what we expect from a good cross-lingual
model. The mean and standard deviation of all similarity measurements also support the crosslingual model performance, as follows:
>>> np.mean(sims), np.std(sims)
(0.946, 0.082)

343

344

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

11. You can run the same code yourself for languages other than Russian. As you run it with French
(fra), Tamil (tam), and so on, you will get the following resulting table. The table indicates
that in your experiment, you will see that the model works well in many languages but fails in
others, such as Afrikaans or Tamil:
Language

Code

Mean

Std

French

fra

0.94

0.087

Afrikaans

afr

0.79

0.18

Arabic

ara

0.94

0.08

Korean

kor

0.92

0.11

Tamil

tam

0.77

0.19

Table 13.1 – Cross-lingual model performance for other languages

In this section, we applied cross-lingual models to measure similarity between different languages. In
the next section, we’ll make use of cross-lingual models in a supervised way.

Cross-lingual classification
So far, you have learned that cross-lingual models are capable of understanding different languages
in semantic vector space where similar sentences, regardless of their language, are close in terms of
vector distance. However, how it is possible to use this capability in use cases where we have few
samples available?
For example, you are trying to develop an intent classification for a chatbot in which there are few
samples or no samples available for the second language; however, for the first language—let’s say
English—you do have enough samples. In such cases, it is possible to freeze the cross-lingual model
itself and just train a classifier for the task. A trained classifier can be tested on a second language
instead of the language it is trained on.
In this section, you will learn how to train a cross-lingual model in English for text classification and
test it in other languages. We have selected a very low-resource language known as Khmer, which is
spoken by 16 million people in Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. It has few resources on the internet,
and it is hard to find good datasets with which to train your model. However, we have access to a
good Internet Movie Database (IMDb) sentiment dataset of movie reviews for sentiment analysis.
We will use that dataset to find out how our model performs in a language on which it is not trained.
The following diagram nicely depicts the kind of flow we will follow. The model is trained with
training data on the left, and this model is applied to the test sets on the right. Please notice that MT
and sentence-encoder mappings play a significant role in the flow:

Cross-lingual classification

Figure 13.11 – Flow of cross-lingual classification

The required steps to load and train a model for cross-lingual testing are outlined here:
1.

The first step is to load the dataset as follows:
from datasets import load_dataset
sms_spam = load_dataset("imdb")

2.

You need to shuffle the dataset to shuffle the samples before using them, as follows:
imdb = imdb.shuffle()

3.

The next step is to make a good test split out of this dataset, which is in the Khmer language.
In order to do so, you can use a translation service such as Google Translate. First, you should
save this dataset in Excel format as follows:
imdb_x = [x for x in imdb['train'][:1000]['text']]
labels = [x for x in imdb['train'][:1000]['label']]
import pandas as pd
pd.DataFrame(imdb_x,
    columns=["text"]).to_excel(
    "imdb.xlsx",
    index=None)

345

346

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

4.

Afterward, you can upload it to Google Translate and get the Khmer translation of this dataset
(https://translate.google.com/?sl=en&tl=km&op=docs), as illustrated in
the following screenshot:

Figure 13.12 – Google document translator

5.

After selecting and uploading the document, you will obtain the translated version in Khmer,
which you can copy and paste into an Excel file. It is also required to be saved in Excel format
again. The result is an Excel document that is a translation of the original spam/ham English
dataset. You can read it using pandas by running the following command:
pd.read_excel("KHMER.xlsx")

The following results will be seen:

Figure 13.13 – IMDB dataset in KHMER language

Cross-lingual classification

6.

However, we only need to obtain text, so you should use the following code:
imdb_khmer = list(pd.read_excel("KHMER.xlsx").text)

7.

Now that you have text for both languages and the labels, you can split the train and test
validations as follows:
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
train_x, test_x, train_y, test_y, khmer_train, khmer_test = \
    train_test_split(imdb_x, labels, imdb_khmer,
        test_size = 0.2, random_state = 1)

8.

The next step is to provide the representation of these sentences using the XLM-R cross-lingual
model. First, you should load the model as follows:
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer
model = SentenceTransformer("stsb-xlm-r-multilingual")

9.

Now, you can obtain the representations:
encoded_train = model.encode(train_x)
encoded_test = model.encode(test_x)
encoded_khmer_test = model.encode(khmer_test)

10. However, you should not forget to convert the labels into the NumPy format because TensorFlow
and Keras only deal with NumPy arrays when using the fit function of the Keras models. Here’s
how to do it:
import numpy as np
train_y = np.array(train_y)
test_y = np.array(test_y)

11. Now that everything is ready, let’s make a very simple model for classifying the representations:
import tensorflow as tf
input_ = tf.keras.layers.Input((768,))
classification = tf.keras.layers.Dense(
    1, activation="sigmoid")(input_)
classification_model = \
    tf.keras.Model(input_, classification)
classification_model.compile(
    loss=tf.keras.losses.BinaryCrossentropy(),
    optimizer="Adam",
    metrics=["accuracy", "Precision", "Recall"])

347

348

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

12. You can fit your model using the following function:
classification_model.fit(
    x = encoded_train,
    y = train_y,
    validation_data=(encoded_test, test_y),
    epochs = 10)

13. The results for 20 epochs of training are shown here:

Figure 13.14 – Training results on the English version of the IMDb dataset

14. As you have seen, we used an English test set to see the model performance across epochs, and
it is reported in the final epoch as follows:
val_loss: 0.5226
val_accuracy: 0.7150
val_precision: 0.7600
val_recall: 0.6972

15. Now, we have trained our model and tested it on English; let’s test it on the Khmer test set,
as our model had not seen any of the samples in either English or Khmer. Here’s the code to
accomplish this:
classification_model.evaluate(x = encoded_khmer_test,
    y = test_y)

Cross-lingual zero-shot learning

Here are the results:
loss: 0.5949
accuracy: 0.7250
precision: 0.7014
recall: 0.8623

So far, you have learned how it is possible to leverage the capabilities of cross-lingual models in
low-resource languages. It makes a huge impact and difference when you can use such a capability in
cases where there are very few samples or no samples on which to train the model. In the next section,
you will learn how it is possible to use zero-shot learning where there are no samples available, even
for high-resource languages such as English.

Cross-lingual zero-shot learning
In the previous sections, you learned how to perform zero-shot text classification using monolingual
models. Using XLM-R for multilingual and cross-lingual zero-shot classification is identical to the
approach and code used previously, so we will use mT5 here.
mT5, which is a massively multilingual pretrained language model, is based on the encoder-decoder
architecture of Transformers and is also identical to T5. T5 is pretrained on English and mT5 is trained
on 101 languages from Multilingual Common Crawl (mC4).
The fine-tuned version of mT5 on the XNLI dataset is available from the Hugging Face
repository (https://huggingface.co/alan-turing-institute/mt5-largefinetuned-mnli-xtreme-xnli).
The T5 model and its variant, mT5, are completely text-to-text models, which means they will produce
text for any task given, even if the task is classification or NLI. So, in the case of inferring this model,
extra steps are required. We’ll take the following steps:
1.

The first step is to load the model and the tokenizer as follows:
from torch.nn.functional import softmax
from transformers import(
    MT5ForConditionalGeneration, MT5Tokenizer)
model_name = "alan-turing-institute/mt5-large-finetuned-mnlixtreme-xnli"
tokenizer = MT5Tokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name)
model = MT5ForConditionalGeneration\
    .from_pretrained(model_name)

349

350

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

2.

In the next step, let’s provide samples to be used in zero-shot classification—a sentence and
labels—as follows:
sequence_to_classify = \
    "Wen arden Sie bei der nächsten Wahl wählen? "
candidate_labels = ["spor", "ekonomi", "politika"]
hypothesis_template = "Dieses Beispiel ist {}."

As you can see, the sequence itself is in German (“Who will you vote for in the next election?”)
but the labels are written in Turkish (“spor”, “ekonomi”, “politika”). hypothesis_template
says: “this example is ...” in German.
3.

The next step is to set the label identifiers (IDs) of the entailment, CONTRADICTS, and
NEUTRAL, which will be used later when inferring the generated results. Here’s the code
you’ll need to do this:
ENTAILS_LABEL = "_0"
NEUTRAL_LABEL = "_1"
CONTRADICTS_LABEL = "_2"
label_inds = tokenizer.convert_tokens_to_ids([
    ENTAILS_LABEL,
    NEUTRAL_LABEL,
    CONTRADICTS_LABEL])

4.

As you’ll recall, the T5 model uses prefixes to know which task it is supposed to perform. The
following function provides the XNLI prefix, along with the premise and hypothesis in the
proper format:
def process_nli(premise, hypothesis):
    return f'xnli: premise: {premise} hypothesis: {hypothesis}'

5.

In the next step, for each label, a sentence will be generated, as illustrated in the following
code snippet:
pairs =[(sequence_to_classify,\
    hypothesis_template.format(label)) for label in
    candidate_labels]
seqs = [process_nli(premise=premise,
    hypothesis=hypothesis)
    for premise, hypothesis in pairs]

Cross-lingual zero-shot learning

6.

You can see the resulting sequences by printing them as follows:
print(seqs)
['xnli: premise: Wen werden Sie bei der nächsten Wahl
wählen?  hypothesis: Dieses Beispiel ist spor.',
'xnli: premise: Wen werden Sie bei der nächsten Wahl
wählen?  hypothesis: Dieses Beispiel ist ekonomi.',
'xnli: premise: Wen werden Sie bei der nächsten Wahl
wählen?  hypothesis: Dieses Beispiel ist politika.']

These sequences simply say that the task is XNLI-coded by xnli:; the premise sentence is “Who
will you vote for in the next election?” (in German), and the hypothesis is “this example is
politics”, “this example is a sport” or “this example is economy”.
7.

In the next step, you can tokenize the sequences and give them to the model to generate the
text according to it:
inputs = tokenizer.batch_encode_plus(seqs,
    return_tensors="pt", padding=True)
out = model.generate(**inputs, output_scores=True,
    return_dict_in_generate=True,num_beams=1)

8.

The generated text actually gives scores for each token in the vocabulary, and what we are
looking for is the entailment, contradiction, and neutral scores. You can get their score using
their token IDs as follows:
scores = out.scores[0]
scores = scores[:, label_inds]

9.

You can see these scores by printing them:
print(scores)
tensor([[-0.9851,  2.2550, -0.0783],
        [-5.1690, -0.7202, -2.5855],
        [ 2.7442,  3.6727,  0.7169]])

10. The neutral score is not required for our purpose, and we only need contradiction compared
to entailment. So, you can use the following code to obtain these scores only:
entailment_ind = 0
contradiction_ind = 2
entail_vs_contra_scores = scores[:, [entailment_ind,
contradiction_ind]]

351

352

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

11. Now that you have these scores for each sequence of the samples, you can apply a softmax layer
to them to obtain the probabilities as follows:
entail_vs_contra_probas = softmax(entail_vs_contra_scores,
dim=1)

12. To see these probabilities, you can use print:
print(entail_vs_contra_probas)
tensor([[0.2877, 0.7123],
        [0.0702, 0.9298],
        [0.8836, 0.1164]])

13. Now, you can compare the entailment probability of these three samples by selecting them and
applying a softmax layer over them as follows:
entail_scores = scores[:, entailment_ind]
entail_probas = softmax(entail_scores, dim=0)

14. To see the values, use print as follows:
print(entail_probas)
tensor([2.3438e-02, 3.5716e-04, 9.7620e-01])

15. The result means the highest probability belongs to the third sequence. In order to see it in a
better shape, use the following code:
print(dict(zip(candidate_labels, entail_probas.tolist())))
{'ekonomi': 0.0003571564157027751,
'politika': 0.9762046933174133,
'spor': 0.023438096046447754}

The whole process can be summarized as follows: each label is given to the model with the premise,
and the model generates scores for each token in the vocabulary. We use these scores to find out how
much the entailment token scores over the contradiction.

Massive multilingual translation
Speaking of cross-lingual models and models that can perform well on multilingual data, one of the
tasks that are always important in this field is translation. However, different approaches exist for
translation; some approaches suggest having different models for each language pair, whereas others
suggest using a single model for all of the language pairs.

Massive multilingual translation

M2M100 is one of the most important models in this field and can translate 9,900 directions in
100 languages. Using this model and performing translation tasks is simple with the help of the
transformers library:
from transformers import (
    M2M100ForConditionalGeneration, M2M100Tokenizer)
model = M2M100ForConditionalGeneration.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/m2m100_1.2B")
tokenizer = M2M100Tokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/m2m100_1.2B")

Before giving the input to the model, you need to also set the source language of the text as well:
text_turkish = "ne olacak bu insanlik hali?"
tokenizer.src_lang = "tr"
encoded_text = tokenizer(text_turkish, return_tensors="pt")

To generate the output, the language id of the target language should be passed to the model as well,
as it will guide the model to generate the translation in the given language:
generated_tokens = model.generate(**encoded_text,
    forced_bos_token_id=tokenizer.get_lang_id("fa"))
text_persian = tokenizer.batch_decode(generated_tokens,
    skip_special_tokens=True)

Now, you can see the translated output in Persian:
print(text_persian[0])
‫این وضعیت ش‬
‫ب�ی چه خواهد بود؟‬

You can use any of the 101 languages supported by the model for source and destination text. So far,
you have learned how massive machine translation models work. In the next part, you will learn more
about the fundamental limitations of multilingual models.
Despite the potential of multilingual and cross-lingual models in NLP, their effectiveness is limited
in smaller language models such as BERT. This has been the focus of many studies. For example, the
mBERT model doesn’t perform as well as monolingual models in various tasks, which is why the latter
is still commonly used, particularly in classification tasks. On the other hand, recent developments in
larger language models have largely addressed the limitations of multilingual models and improved
their capacity. This improvement is attributed to an increase in parameters, expanded training datasets,
and advanced training methods, such as reinforcement learning. Consequently, there’s been a rise in
successful multilingual models such as mT5, Bloomz, Bactrian-x, and Aya-101. These models are
open source and, thus, accessible.

353

354

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

Studies in the field indicate that multilingual models suffer from the so-called curse of multilingualism
as they seek to appropriately represent all languages. Adding new languages to a multilingual model
improves its performance up to a certain point. However, it is also seen that adding more after this
point degrades performance, which may be due to shared vocabulary. Compared to monolingual
models, multilingual models are significantly more limited in terms of the parameter budget. They
need to allocate their vocabulary to each of more than 100 languages.
The existing performance differences between mono- and multilingual models can be attributed to
the capability of the designated tokenizer. The study How Good is Your Tokenizer? On the Monolingual
Performance of Multilingual Language Models (2021) by Rust et al. (https://arxiv.org/
abs/2012.15613) showed that when a dedicated language-specific tokenizer (rather than a
general-purpose one, e.g., a shared multilingual tokenizer) is attached to a multilingual model, it
improves in performance for that language.
Some other findings indicate that it is not currently possible to represent all the world’s languages in a
single model due to an imbalance in the distribution of resources for different languages. As a solution,
low-resource languages can be oversampled, while high-resource languages can be undersampled.
Another observation is that knowledge transfer between two languages can be more efficient if those
languages are close. If they are distant languages, this transfer may have little effect. This observation
may explain why we got worse results for Afrikaans and Tamil languages in the previous cross-lingual
sentence-pair experiment part.
However, there is a lot of work on this subject, and these limitations may be overcome at any time. As
of writing this article, the team of XML-R recently proposed two new models—namely, XLM-R XL
and XLM-R XXL—that outperform the original XLM-R model by 1.8% and 2.4% average accuracies,
respectively, on XNLI.

Fine-tuning the performance of multilingual models
Now, let’s check whether the fine-tuned performance of the multilingual models is actually worse than
that of the monolingual models. As an example, let’s recall the example of Turkish text classification
with seven classes in Chapter 5. In that experiment, we fine-tuned a Turkish-specific monolingual
model and achieved a good result. We will repeat the same experiment, keeping everything as-is but
replacing the Turkish monolingual model with the mBERT and XLM-R models, respectively. Here’s
how we’ll do this:
1.

Let’s recall the codes in that example again. We fine-tuned the “dbmdz/bert-base-turkishuncased” model as follows:
from transformers import BertTokenizerFast
tokenizer = BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(
    "dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-uncased")
from transformers import BertForSequenceClassification
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(\

Massive multilingual translation

    "dbmdz/bert-base-turkish-uncased",
    num_labels=NUM_LABELS,
    id2label=id2label,
    label2id=label2id)

With the monolingual model, we got the following performance values:

Figure 13.15 – Monolingual text classification performance (from Chapter 5)

2.

To fine-tune using mBERT, we need to replace the preceding model instantiation lines only. Now,
we will use the “bert-base-multilingual-uncased” multilingual model. We instantiate it like this:
from transformers import(
    BertForSequenceClassification, AutoTokenizer)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "bert-base-multilingual-uncased")
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
    "bert-base-multilingual-uncased",
    num_labels=NUM_LABELS,
    id2label=id2label,
    label2id=label2id)

3.

There is not much difference in coding. When we run the experiment keeping all other parameters
and settings the same, we get the following performance values:

Figure 13.16 – mBERT fine-tuned performance

355

356

Cross-Lingual and Multilingual Language Modeling

Hmm! The multilingual model underperforms compared with its monolingual counterpart
by roughly 2.2% for all metrics.
4.

Let’s fine-tune the “xlm-roberta-base” XLM-R model for the same problem. We’ll execute the
XLM-R model initialization code as follows:
from transformers import (
    AutoTokenizer, XLMRobertaForSequenceClassification)
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(
    "xlm-roberta-base")
model = XLMRobertaForSequenceClassification\
    .from_pretrained("xlm-roberta-base",
        num_labels=NUM_LABELS,
        id2label=id2label,label2id=label2id)

5.

Again, we keep all other settings exactly the same. We get the following performance values
from the XML-R model:

Figure 13.17 – XLM-R fine-tuned performance

Not bad! The XLM model did give comparable results. The obtained results are quite close to the
monolingual model, with a roughly 1.0% difference. Therefore, although monolingual results can be
better than multilingual models in certain tasks, we can achieve promising results with multilingual
models. Think of it this way: we may not want to train a whole monolingual model for a 1% improvement
in performance that lasts 10 days or more. Such small performance differences may be negligible for us.

Summary

Summary
In this chapter, you learned about multilingual and cross-lingual language model pretraining and
the difference between monolingual and multilingual pretraining. CLM and TLM were also covered,
and you gained knowledge about them. You learned how it is possible to use cross-lingual models
on various use cases, such as semantic search, plagiarism, and zero-shot text classification. You also
learned how it is possible to train using a dataset from a language and test the model on a completely
different language using cross-lingual models. Fine-tuning the performance of multilingual models
was evaluated, and we concluded that some multilingual models could be a substitute for monolingual
models, remarkably keeping performance loss to a minimum. We also took a look at the models
that can translate at a massive scale; M2M100, for example, can translate in 9,900 directions in 100
languages, and we learned how to use this model.
In the next chapter, you will learn how to deploy transformer models for real problems and train them
for production at an industrial scale.

References
• Conneau, A., Lample, G., Rinott, R., Williams, A., Bowman, S. R., Schwenk, H. and Stoyanov, V.
(2018). XNLI: Evaluating cross-lingual sentence representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.05053.
• Xue, L., Constant, N., Roberts, A., Kale, M., Al-Rfou, R., Siddhant, A. and Raffel, C. (2020). mT5:
A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11934.
• Lample, G. and Conneau, A. (2019). Cross-lingual language model pretraining. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1901.07291.
• Conneau, A., Khandelwal, K., Goyal, N., Chaudhary, V., Wenzek, G., Guzmán, F. and Stoyanov, V.
(2019). Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116.
• Feng, F., Yang, Y., Cer, D., Arivazhagan, N. and Wang, W. (2020). Language-agnostic bert sentence
embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01852.
• Rust, P., Pfeiffer, J., Vulić, I., Ruder, S. and Gurevych, I. (2020). How Good is Your Tokenizer? On
the Monolingual Performance of Multilingual Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.15613.
• Goyal, N., Du, J., Ott, M., Anantharaman, G. and Conneau, A. (2021). Larger-Scale Transformers
for Multilingual Masked Language Modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00572.
• Fan, A., Bhosale, S., Schwenk, H., Ma, Z., El-Kishky, A., Goyal, S., ... & Joulin, A. (2021). Beyond
english-centric multilingual machine translation. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
22(1), 4839-4886.

357

14
Serving Transformer Models
So far, we’ve explored many aspects surrounding Transformers, and you’ve learned how to train
and use a Transformer model from scratch. You also learned how to fine-tune them for many tasks.
However, we still don’t know how to serve these models in production. Like any other real-life and
modern solution, natural language processing (NLP)-based solutions must be able to be served in
a production environment. However, metrics such as response time must be taken into consideration
while developing such solutions.
This chapter will explain how to serve a Transformer-based NLP solution in environments where a
CPU/GPU is available. TensorFlow Extended (TFX) as a solution for machine learning deployment
will be described here. Also, other solutions for serving Transformers as application programming
interfaces (APIs) such as FastAPI will be illustrated. You will also learn about the basics of Docker, as
well as how to Dockerize your service and make it deployable. Lastly, you will learn how to perform
speed and load tests on Transformer-based solutions using Locust.
We will cover the following topics in this chapter:
• FastAPI Transformer model serving
• Dockerizing APIs
• Faster Transformer model serving using TFX
• Load testing using Locust
• Faster inference using ONNX
• SageMaker inference

360

Serving Transformer Models

Technical requirements
We will be using Jupyter Notebook, Python, and Docker to run our coding exercises, which will
require Python 3.6.0. The following packages need to be installed:
• tensorflow
• pytorch
• transformer >=4.00
• fastapi
• docker
• locust
• optimum
• onnxruntime
Now, let’s get started!
All the notebooks for the coding exercises in this chapter will be available at the following GitHub
link: https://github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-SecondEdition.

FastAPI Transformer model serving
There are many web frameworks we can use for serving. Sanic, Flask, and FastAPI are just some
examples. However, FastAPI has recently gained a lot of attention because of its speed and reliability.
In this section, we will use FastAPI and learn how to build a service according to its documentation.
We will also use pydantic to define our data classes. Let’s begin!
1.

Before we start, we must install pydantic and FastAPI:
$ pip install pydantic
$ pip install fastapi

2.

The next step is to make the data model for decorating the input of the API using pydantic.
But before forming the data model, we must know what our model is and identify its input.
We are going to use a question-answering (QA) model for this. As you know from Chapter 6,
the input is in the form of a question and a context.

FastAPI Transformer model serving

3.

By using the following data model, you can make the QA data model:
from pydantic import BaseModel
class QADataModel(BaseModel):
    question: str
    context: str

4.

We must load the model once and not load it for each request; instead, we will preload it once
and reuse it. Because the endpoint function is called each time we send a request to the server,
this will result in the model being loaded each time:
from transformers import pipeline
model_name = 'distilbert-base-cased-distilled-squad'
model = pipeline(model=model_name, tokenizer=model_name,
    task='question-answering')

5.

The next step is to make a FastAPI instance for moderating the application:
from fastapi import FastAPI
app = FastAPI()

6.

Afterward, you must make a FastAPI endpoint using the following code:
@app.post("/question_answering")
async def qa(input_data: QADataModel):
    result = model(question = input_data.question,
context=input_data.context)
    return {"result": result["answer"]}

7.

It is important to use async for the function to make this function run in asynchronous mode;
this will be parallelized for requests. You can also use the workers parameter to increase the
number of workers for the API and make it answer different and independent API calls at once.

8.

Using uvicorn, you can run your application and serve it as an API. Uvicorn is a lightningfast server implementation for Python-based APIs that makes them run as fast as possible.
Use the following code for this:
if __name__ == '__main__':
    uvicorn.run('main:app', workers=1)

9.

It is important to remember that the preceding code must be saved in a .py file (main.py,
for example). You can run it by using the following command:
$ python main.py

361

362

Serving Transformer Models

As a result, you will see the following output in your terminal:

Figure 14.1 – FastAPI in action

10. The next step is to use and test it. There are many tools we can use for this but Postman is one
of the best. Before we learn how to use Postman, use the following code:
$ curl --location --request POST 'http://127.0.0.1:8000/
question_answering' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data-raw '{
    "question":"What is extractive question answering?",
    "context":"Extractive Question Answering is the task of
extracting an answer from a text given a question. An example
of a question answering dataset is the SQuAD dataset, which is
entirely based on that task. If you would like to fine-tune a
model on a SQuAD task, you may leverage the `run_squad.py`."
}'

As a result, you will get the following output:
{"answer":"the task of extracting an answer from a text given a
question"}

11. cURL is a useful tool but not as handy as Postman. Postman comes with a GUI and is easier to
use compared to curl, which is a command-line interface (CLI) tool. To use Postman, install
it from https://www.postman.com/downloads/.
12. After installing Postman, you can easily use it, as shown in the following screenshot:

FastAPI Transformer model serving

Figure 14.2 – Postman usage

Each step for setting up Postman for your service is numbered in the preceding screenshot. Let’s take
a look at them:
1.

Select POST as your method.

2.

Enter your full endpoint URL.

3.

Select Body.

4.

Set Body to raw.

5.

Select the JSON data type.

6.

Enter your input data in JSON format.

7.

Click Send.

You will see the result in the bottom section of Postman.
In the next section, you will learn how to Dockerize your FastAPI-based API. It is essential to learn
about Docker basics to make your APIs packageable and easier for deployment.

363

364

Serving Transformer Models

Dockerizing APIs
To save time during production and ease the deployment process, it is essential to use Docker. It
is very important to isolate your service and application. Also, note that the same code can be run
anywhere, regardless of the underlying operating system (OS). To achieve this, Docker provides great
functionality and packaging. Before using it, you must install it using the steps recommended in the
Docker documentation (https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/):
1.

First, put the main.py file in the app directory.

2.

Next, you must eliminate the last part of your code by specifying the following:
if __name__ == '__main__':
    uvicorn.run('main:app', workers=1)

3.

The next step is to make a Dockerfile for your FastAPI service; you made this previously. To
do so, you must create a Dockerfile that contains the following content:
FROM python:3.7
RUN pip install torch
RUN pip install fastapi uvicorn transformers
EXPOSE 80
COPY ./app /app
CMD ["uvicorn", "app.main:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--port",
"8000"]

4.

Afterward, you can build your Docker container:
$ docker build -t qaapi .

And easily start it using the following command:
$ docker run -p 8000:8000 qaapi

As a result, you can now access your API using port 8000. However, you can still use Postman,
as described in the previous section, FastAPI Transformer model serving.
So far, you have learned how to make your own API based on a Transformer model and serve it using
FastAPI. You then learned how to Dockerize it. It is important to know that there are many options
and setups you must learn about regarding Docker; we only covered the basics of Docker here.
In the next section, you will learn how to improve your model serving using TFX.

Faster Transformer model serving using TFX

Faster Transformer model serving using TFX
TFX provides a faster and more efficient way to serve deep learning-based models but it has some
important key points you must understand before you use it. The model must be a saved model type
from TensorFlow so that it can be used by TFX Docker or the CLI. Let’s take a look:
1.

You can perform TFX model serving by using a saved model format from TensorFlow. For
more information about TensorFlow saved models, you can read the official documentation
at https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/saved_model. To make a saved model
from Transformers, you can simply use the following code:
from transformers import TFBertForSequenceClassification
model = \
    TFBertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
        "nateraw/bert-base-uncased-imdb",
        from_pt=True)
model.save_pretrained("tfx_model", saved_model=True)

2.

Before we understand how to use it to serve Transformers, we need to pull the Docker image
for TFX:
$ docker pull tensorflow/serving

3.

This will pull the Docker container of the TFX model being served. The next step is to run the
Docker container and copy the saved model into it:
$ docker run -d --name serving_base tensorflow/serving

4.

You can copy the saved file into the Docker container using the following code:
$ docker cp tfx_model/saved_model tfx:/models/bert

5.

This will copy the saved model files into the container. However, you must commit the changes:
$ docker commit --change "ENV MODEL_NAME bert" tfx my_bert_model

6.

Now that everything is ready, you can kill the Docker container:
$ docker kill tfx

This will stop the container from running.
Now that the model is ready and can be served by the TFX model Docker container, you can
simply use it with another service. The reason we need another service to call TFX is that the
Transformer-based models have a special input format provided by tokenizers.

365

366

Serving Transformer Models

7.

To do so, you must make a FastAPI service that will model the API that was served by the
TensorFlow serving container. Before you code your service, you should start the Docker
container by giving it parameters to run the BERT-based model. This will help you fix bugs in
case there are any errors:
$ docker run -p 8501:8501 -p 8500:8500 --name bert my_bert_model

8.

The following code contains the content of the main.py file:
import uvicorn
from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel
from transformers import BertTokenizerFast, BertConfig
import requests
import json
import numpy as np
tokenizer =\
    BertTokenizerFast.from_pretrained(
"nateraw/bert-base-uncased-imdb")
config = BertConfig.from_pretrained(
"nateraw/bert-base-uncased-imdb")
class DataModel(BaseModel):
    text: str
app = FastAPI()
@app.post("/sentiment")
async def sentiment_analysis(input_data: DataModel):
    print(input_data.text)
    tokenized_sentence = [dict(tokenizer(input_data.text))]
    data_send = {"instances": tokenized_sentence}
    response = \
    requests.post(
"http://localhost:8501/v1/models/bert:predict",
        data=json.dumps(data_send))
    result = np.abs(json.loads(response.text)["predictions"][0])
    return {"sentiment": config.id2label[np.argmax(result)]}
if __name__ == '__main__':
    uvicorn.run('main:app', workers=1)

9.

We have loaded the config file because the labels are stored in it, and we need them to return
it in the result. You can simply run this file using Python:
$ python main.py

Faster Transformer model serving using TFX

Now, your service is up and ready to use. You can access it using Postman, as shown in the
following screenshot:

Figure 14.3 – Postman output of a TFX-based service

The overall architecture of the new service within TFX Docker is shown in the following diagram:

Figure 14.4 – TFX-based service architecture

So far, you have learned how to serve a model using TFX. However, you need to learn how to load test
your service using Locust. It is important to know the limits of your service and when to optimize it
by using quantization or pruning. In the next section, we will describe how to test model performance
under heavy load using Locust.

367

368

Serving Transformer Models

Load testing using Locust
There are many applications we can use to load test services. Most of these applications and libraries
provide useful information about the response time and delay of the service. They also provide
information about the failure rate. Locust is one of the best tools for this purpose. We will use it to
load test three methods for serving a Transformer-based model: using FastAPI only, using Dockerized
FastAPI, and TFX-based serving using FastAPI. Let’s get started:
1.

First, we must install locust:
$ pip install locust

This command will install Locust. The next step is to make all the services serving an identical
task use the same model. Fixing two of the most important parameters of this test will ensure
that all the services have been designed identically to serve a single purpose. Using the same
model will help us freeze anything else and focus on the deployment performance of the methods.
2.

Once everything is ready, you can start load testing your APIs. You must prepare an instance
locustfile to define your user and its behavior. The following code is of a simple locustfile:
from locust import HttpUser, task
from random import choice
from string import ascii_uppercase
class User(HttpUser):
    @task
    def predict(self):
        payload = {"text": ''.join(choice(ascii_uppercase) for i
in range(20))}
        self.client.post("/sentiment", json=payload)

By using HttpUser and creating the User class that’s inherited from it, we can define an
HttpUser class. The @task decorator is essential for defining the task that the user must
perform after spawning. The predict function is the actual task that the user will perform
repeatedly after spawning. It will generate a random string that is 20 characters in length and
send it to your API.
3.

To start the test, you must start your service. Once you’ve started your service, run the following
code to start the Locust load test:
$ locust -f locust_file.py

Locust will start with the settings you provided in your locustfile. You will see the
following in your Terminal:

Load testing using Locust

Figure 14.5 – Terminal after starting a Locust load test

As you can see, you can open the URL where the load web interface is located – that
is, http://0.0.0.0:8089.
4.

After opening the URL, you will see an interface, as shown in the following screenshot:

Figure 14.6 – Locust web interface

5.

As seen in Figure 14.6, we are going to set Number of total users to simulate to 10, Spawn
rate to 1, and Host to http://127.0.0.1:8000, which is where our service is running.
After setting these parameters, click Start swarming.

6.

At this point, the UI will change and the test will begin. To stop the test at any time, click the
Stop button.

369

370

Serving Transformer Models

7.

You can also click the Charts tab to see a visualization of the results:

Figure 14.7 – An overview of Locust test results from the Charts tab

8.

Now that the test is ready for the API, let’s test all three versions and compare the results to see
which one performs better. Remember that the services must be tested independently on the
machine where you want to serve them. In other words, you must run one service at a time:
run and test the first one, then close it, run and test the second one, then close it, and so on.
The results are shown in the following table:

Figure 14.8 – Comparing the results of different implementations

In the preceding table, requests per second (RPS) means the number of requests per second
that the API answers, while the average response time (RT) means the milliseconds that the
service takes to respond to a given call. These results show that the TFX-based FastAPI is the
fastest. It has a higher RPS and a lower average RT. All these tests were performed on a machine
with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9750H CPU with 32 GB RAM, and GPU disabled.
In this section, you learned how to test your API and measure its performance in terms of important
parameters such as RPS and RT. However, there are many other stress tests a real-world API can
perform, such as increasing the number of users to make them behave like real users. To perform
such tests and report their results more realistically, it is important to read Locust’s documentation
and learn how to perform more advanced tests.

Faster inference using ONNX

Inference always plays a crucial role when we want to deploy the model. In the next section, we will
try to make the model faster using ONNX.

Faster inference using ONNX
Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) provides faster inference for models that are trained. The
optimum library, on the other hand, provides easier ONNX exports for even pipelines of Hugging
Face-based models. The usage and implementation are straightforward, as you will see:
1.

The first thing to do is install the optimum and onnxruntime libraries:
$ pip install optimum[onnxruntime]

2.

The next step is to load the pipeline using the optimum pipeline:
from optimum.pipelines import pipeline
pipe = pipeline("text-classification",
    "cardiffnlp/twitter-xlm-roberta-base-sentiment",
    accelerator="ort")

3.

Two types of accelerators exist: ONNX runtime (ORT) and BETTERTRANSFORMER.
ORT is used for the ONNX export of the model. For this specific example, we just picked a
multilingual sentiment analysis model based on XLM-Roberta. Now that it has been converted,
you can easily run the pipeline:
pipe("It was a great movie!")
[{'label': 'positive', 'score': 0.9436209201812744}]

This simple change in the loading model and converting it to ONNX improves the latency of the
model and provides a faster model.
Hosting models is a challenge but SageMaker provides nice functionality to do it more easily. The
next section will describe it.

SageMaker inference
Amazon, in collaboration with Hugging Face, created a nice way of deploying models using only
a few lines of code. To deploy any model using SageMaker, you can simply visit the model page at
Hugging Face and click the Amazon SageMaker button. Please also note that other methods such
as Azure are also available:

371

372

Serving Transformer Models

Figure 14.9 – Amazon SageMaker button

This will give the related code to use SageMaker for inference but note that you need to set up the
AWS SageMaker environment first. We did not include this part in the book because it is another
topic entirely, but you can easily find it in the SageMaker documentation (https://aws.amazon.
com/sagemaker/).
Let’s see how we can use SageMaker for inference:
1.

The first step is to install sagemaker and then import it:
import sagemaker
import boto3
from sagemaker.huggingface import HuggingFaceModel

2.

The next step is to run this code to get the role:
try:
    role = sagemaker.get_execution_role()
except ValueError:
    iam = boto3.client('iam')
    role = \
        iam.get_role(RoleName='sagemaker_execution_role')
['Role']['Arn']

Summary

3.

Afterward, it is required to have the Hugging Face Hub model configuration:
hub = {
    'HF_MODEL_ID': \
'cardiffnlp/twitter-xlm-roberta-base-sentiment',
    'HF_TASK':'text-classification'
}

4.

It is also necessary to create a SageMaker huggingface_model object:
huggingface_model = HuggingFaceModel(
    transformers_version='4.26.0',
    pytorch_version='1.13.1',
    py_version='py39',
    env=hub,
    role=role,
)

5.

The final step is to deploy the model:
predictor = huggingface_model.deploy(
    initial_instance_count=1, # number of instances
    instance_type='ml.m5.xlarge' # ec2 instance type
)

6.

Now it is very easy to use the model with the following example:
predictor.predict({
    "inputs": " The movie was not good at all",
})

During this section and the entire chapter, you have learned many things about how to serve models
and how to use services such as SageMaker.

Summary
In this chapter, you learned about the basics of serving Transformer models using FastAPI. You also
learned how to serve models in a more advanced and efficient way, such as by using TFX. You then
studied the basics of load testing and creating users. Making these users spawn in groups or one by
one, and then reporting the results of stress testing, was another major topic of this chapter. After
that, you studied the basics of Docker and learned how to package your application in the form of a
Docker container. Finally, you learned how to serve Transformer-based models.
In the next chapter, you will learn about Transformer deconstruction, the model view, and monitoring
training using various tools and techniques.

373

374

Serving Transformer Models

Further reading
To learn more about model serving and how these libraries can be used for very specific use cases,
you can follow the following links:
• Locust documentation: https://docs.locust.io
• TFX documentation: https://www.tensorflow.org/tfx/guide
• FastAPI documentation: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com
• Docker documentation: https://docs.docker.com
• Hugging Face TFX serving: https://huggingface.co/blog/tf-serving

15
Model Tracking and Monitoring
When training deep learning models, it is crucial to take various factors into account during the
training process. This approach enables us to conduct highly effective experiments. In this chapter, we
will cover experiment tracking through sophisticated tools. We will learn how to track experiments
by logging and then monitoring them with TensorBoard and Weights & Biases (W&B). These tools
enable us to efficiently host and track experimental data such as loss, or other metrics that help us to
optimize model training.
In this chapter, we will cover the following topic:
• Tracking model metrics
• Tracking model training with TensorBoard
• Tracking model training live with W&B

Technical requirements
The code for this chapter is found at https://github.com/PacktPublishing/MasteringTransformers-Second-Edition, which is the GitHub repository for this book. We will be using
Jupyter Notebook to run our coding exercises that require Python 3.6.0 or above, and the following
packages will need to be installed:
• tensorflow
• pytorch
• transformers >=4.00
• tensorboard
• wandb

376

Model Tracking and Monitoring

Tracking model metrics
So far, we have trained language models and simply analyzed the final results. In Chapter 8, we observed
the training process and compared training processes with Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO).
In this section, we will briefly discuss how to visually monitor model training with some external
tools. To do this, we will take the example that we developed in Chapter 5.
There are several important experiment-tracking frameworks in deep learning, such as MLflow,
Neptune, TensorBoard, W&B, CodeCarbon, and ClearML. To keep it simple, we will use TensorBoard
and W&B. With the former, we save the training results to a local drive and visualize them at the end
of the experiment. With the latter, we monitor the model-training progress live in a cloud platform.
This section will be a short introduction to these tools without going into much detail about them, as
this is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Next, let’s start with TensorBoard.

Tracking model training with TensorBoard
TensorBoard is a visualization tool specifically for deep learning experiments. It has many features,
such as tracking, training, projecting embeddings to a lower space, and visualizing model graphs. We
mostly use it for tracking and visualizing metrics such as loss. Tracking a metric with TensorBoard
is so easy for Transformers that adding a couple of lines to model-training code will be enough.
Everything is kept almost the same.
Now, we will repeat the Internet Movie Database (IMDb) sentiment fine-tuning experiment from
Chapter 5, and we will track the metrics. In that chapter, we trained a sentiment model with an IMDb
dataset consisting of 4,000 training dataset, 1,000 validation set, and 1,000 test set. Now, we will adapt
it to TensorBoard. For more details about TensorBoard, please visit https://www.tensorflow.
org/tensorboard.
Let’s begin:
1.

First, we install TensorBoard if it is not already installed, like this:
!pip install tensorboard

2.

Keeping the other code lines of IMDb sentiment analysis as-is from Chapter 5, we set the
training argument as follows:
from Transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir='./MyIMDBModel',
    do_train=True,

Tracking model metrics

    do_eval=True,
    num_train_epochs=3,
    per_device_train_batch_size=16,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=32,
    logging_strategy='steps',
    logging_dir='./logs',
    logging_steps=50,
    evaluation_strategy="steps",
    save_strategy="epoch",
    fp16=True,
    load_best_model_at_end=True
)

In the preceding code snippet, the value of logging_dir will soon be passed to TensorBoard
as a parameter. As the training dataset size is 4,000 and the training batch size is 16, we have
250 steps (4,000/16) for each epoch, which means 750 steps for three epochs.
3.

We set logging_steps to 50, which is a sampling interval. As the interval has been reduced,
more details about where model performance rises or falls are recorded. We’ll do another
experiment later on, reducing this sampling interval in step 7 to get a higher resolution for
deeper analysis.

4.

Now, every 50 steps, the model’s performance is measured in terms of the metrics that we
define in compute_metrics(). The metrics to measure are accuracy, F1, precision, and
recall. As a result, we will have 15 (750/50) performance measurements to record. When
we run trainer.train(), this starts the training process and records the logs in the
logging_dir='./logs' directory.

5.

We set load_best_model_at_end to True so that the pipeline loads whichever checkpoint
has the best performance in terms of loss. Once the training is complete, you will notice that
the best model is loaded from checkpoint-250 with a loss score of 0.263.

6.

Now, the only thing we need to do is to call the following code to launch TensorBoard:
%reload_ext tensorboard
%tensorboard --logdir logs

This is the output:

377

378

Model Tracking and Monitoring

Figure 15.1 – An overview of TensorBoard visualization for training history

As you may have noticed, we can trace the metrics that we defined earlier. The horizontal axis
goes from 0 to 750 steps, which is what we calculated before. We will not discuss TensorBoard
in detail here. Let’s just look at the eval/loss chart. When you click on the maximization icon
in the bottom left-hand corner, you will see the following chart:

Figure 15.2 – TensorBoard eval/loss chart for logging steps of 50

Tracking model metrics

In the preceding screenshot, we set the smoothing to 0 with the slider control on the left of
the TensorBoard dashboard to see scores more precisely and to focus on the global minimum.
If your experiment has very high volatility, the smoothing feature can work well to see overall
trends. It functions as a Moving Average (MA). This chart supports our previous observation,
in which the best loss measurement is 0.2658 at step 250.
7.

As logging_steps is set to 10, we get a high resolution, as in the following screenshot.
As a result, 75 (750 steps/10 steps) performance measurements will be recorded. When we
rerun the entire flow with this resolution, we get the best model at step 220, with a loss score
of 0.238, which is better than the previous experiment. The result can be seen in the following
screenshot. We naturally observe more fluctuations due to the higher resolution:

Figure 15.3 – Higher-resolution eval/loss chart for logging steps of 10

We are done with TensorBoard for now. Let’s work with W&B!

Tracking model training live with W&B
W&B, unlike TensorBoard, provides a dashboard in a cloud platform, and we can trace and back up
all experiments in a single hub. It also allows us to work with a team for development and sharing. The
training code is run on our local machine, while the logs are kept in the W&B cloud. Most importantly,
we can follow the training process live and share the results immediately with the community or team.

379

380

Model Tracking and Monitoring

We can enable W&B for our experiments by making very small changes to our existing code:
1.

First of all, we need to create an account in wandb.ai, then install the Python library, as follows:
!pip install wandb

2.

Again, we will take the IMDb sentiment analysis code and make minor changes to it. First, let’s
import the library and log in to wandB, as follows:
import wandb
!wandb login

wandb requests an API key that you can easily find at the following link: https://wandb.
ai/authorize.
3.

Alternatively, you can set the WANDB_API_KEY environment variable to your API key, as follows:
!export WANDB_API_KEY=e7d*********

4.

Again, keeping the entire IMDb sentiment code as-is, we only add two parameters, report_
to="wandb" and run_name="...", to TrainingArguments, which enables logging
in to W&B, as shown in the following code block:
training_args = TrainingArguments(
    ...  the rest is same ...
    run_name="IMDB-batch-32-lr-5e-5",
    report_to="wandb"
)

5.

Then, as soon as you call trainer.train(), logging starts on the cloud. After the call,
please check the cloud dashboard and see how it changes. Once the trainer.train()
call has been completed successfully, we execute the following line to tell wandB we are done:
wandb.finish()

The execution also outputs run history locally, as follows:

Tracking model metrics

Figure 15.4 – The local output of W&B

When you connect to the link provided by W&B, you will get to an interface that looks
something like this:

381

382

Model Tracking and Monitoring

Figure 15.5 – The online visualization of a single run on the W&B dashboard

This visualization gives us a summarized performance result for a single run. As you can see,
we can trace the metrics that we defined in the compute_metric() function.
Now, let’s take a look at the evaluation loss. T﻿he following screenshot shows exactly the same plot that
TensorBoard provided, where the minimum loss is around 0.2658, occurring at step 250:

Tracking model metrics

Figure 15.6 – The eval/loss plot of IMDb experiment on the W&B dashboard

We have only visualized a single run so far. W&B allows us to explore the results dynamically across lots
of runs at once—for example, we can visualize the results of models using different hyperparameters
such as learning rate or batch size. To do so, we instantiate a TrainingArguments object with a
different hyperparameter setting and change run_name="..." accordingly for each run.
The following screenshot shows our several IMDb sentiment-analysis runs using different hyperparameters.
We can also see the batch size and learning rate that we changed:

Figure 15.7 – Exploring the results across several runs on the W&B dashboard

383

384

Model Tracking and Monitoring

W&B provides useful functionality—for instance, it automates hyperparameter optimization and
searching the space of possible models, called W&B sweeps. Other than that, it also provides system
logs relating to Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) consumption, Central Processing Unit (CPU)
utilization, and so on. For more detailed information, please check the following website: https://
wandb.ai/home.
Well done! it’s crucial to use such utility tools to develop better models.

Summary
In this chapter, we introduced model training tracking tools. We learned how to track our experiments
to obtain higher-quality models and do error analysis. We utilized two tools to monitor training:
TensorBoard and W&B. These tools were used to effectively track experiments and to optimize
model training.
In the next chapter, we will discuss how to apply self-attention mechanisms to process images.

Further reading
If you’re interested in learning more about these topics, you may find the following resources helpful:
• Biewald, L., Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. Software available from wandb.
com, 2(5).
• W&B: https://wandb.ai
• TensorBoard: https://www.tensorflow.org/tensorboard

Part 4:
Transformers beyond NLP

Chapter 16 elaborates on the concept of vision transformers, a revolutionary approach that applies
transformer-based models to computer vision tasks, providing a different perspective from traditional
convolutional neural networks.
In Chapter 17, the focus shifts to Multimodal Generative Transformers, a sophisticated model that
can generate complex output spanning multiple modalities, demonstrating the versatility and power
of transformer models.
Lastly, Chapter 18 delves into time series modeling with Transformers, exploring how these models
can be adeptly used to analyze and predict sequential data, thereby broadening their application
beyond natural language processing.
This part has the following chapters:
• Chapter 16, Vision Transformers
• Chapter 17, Multimodal Generative Transformers
• Chapter 18, Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series

16
Vision Transformers
Transformers have been used to achieve significant goals in the field of natural language processing
(NLP) and, as you have seen in the previous chapters, they can accomplish a lot in many different
tasks. In this chapter, we will explore Vision Transformer (ViT) models. Just as a wide range of
models has been created for NLP, various models have also been created for vision, and each one has
created a new view of the computer vision perspective. By reading this chapter, you will learn how
you can use models such as ViT for computer vision tasks, how pretrained computer vision models
based on transformers work, and how you can fine-tune them for specific tasks. We will also look at
models that are prompt-based and can provide results based on the visual prompts given to them.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Vision transformers
• Image classification using transformers
• Semantic segmentation and object detection using transformers
• Visual prompt models

Technical requirements
The following libraries/packages are required to successfully complete this chapter:
• Anaconda
• transformers 4.0.0
• pytorch 1.0.2
• tensorflow 2.4.0
All notebooks with coding exercises will be available at the following GitHub link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

388

Vision Transformers

Vision transformers
Transformers solved many problems in the NLP domain and provided good results. However, some
researchers started to apply them to other domains rather than text-only ones. Computer vision is one
of the fields in which transformers are actively used. In this section, you will learn how it is possible
to apply transformers to computer vision. This was one of the essential problems in the early days of
adaptation. NLP is composed of text-only data that is mostly seen as a time series character-based
input with a respective output. However, computer vision problems come with an image as input
followed by the desired output, which can be in the form of numeric values or a matrix. A gray-scale
image is represented as a matrix with respective width and height values. The easiest way to see it is
as a black-and-white image:

Figure 16.1 – A black and white image of character A

As you can see in Figure 16.1, each cell in the matrix resembles a binary value, 1 or 0. If the value is
0, it will activate an LED (full light on), and if it’s 1, then the LED will be off (or vice versa). This will
show the character A on the screen of a very simple monitor.
In the case of gray-scale images, these values are not just 0 and 1 but, instead, they are a spectrum of
0 to 255 (with 256 colors from full black to full white). In the case of an RGB image, it will not be
only a single matrix but, instead, three matrices, with each one representing each color (red, green, or
blue). This combination will be shown by the pixels on the monitor (with three LEDs for each color).
The intensity of the image will also be shown by these numbers in the matrix.
Now that we know what the most essential part of computer vision is (the image), we can move forward
to see how this type of data can be processed, learned, and used by a transformer.
Transformers are very good with time series data, but images can also be seen as time series somehow.
Imagine converting an image into smaller patches of a 16x16 size (the patch size here is given as an
example). These patches also have a sequential format if we keep giving all of the image patches to
the model in the same order. It is a very similar approach to convolutional neural networks where we
also see the image as patches and apply filters on the patch (or create a filter and move the filter for
the patches), but it is very useful if another dense layer-based embedding is followed. This will ensure
that each patch is not 16x16 but, instead, is a dense representation of that specific part of the image.
Also, don’t forget that positional embedding must be added as well.

Vision transformers

Just like an encoder-only-based model, these models can also be encoder-only. For example, another
bulk token can be added to the first of each operation to create a representation for the entire image
(what we already knew as a [CLS] token). During the classification, we can use this token to classify
the entire image into given classes.
The ViT architecture is shown in Figure 16.2:

Figure 16.2 – ViT architecture

The rest of the architecture is identical to the transformer encoder block. The main idea in architectures
such as ViT is in patching and applying the positional embeddings to the vectors.
Other approaches have been proposed that are very similar to ViT. For example, the Data-Efficient
Image Transformer (DeiT) model uses another token for getting knowledge from other models
such as ResNet. The main difference is that two loss functions are used in the training process: one
for classification cross-entropy loss on the [CLS] token and the other for the distillation token for
teacher model prediction. This further helps the model to grasp the knowledge from the teacher model
and speed up the pretraining phase even further.
Figure 16.3 shows the architecture of the DeiT model:

389

390

Vision Transformers

Figure 16.3 – The DeiT model

ImageGPT (iGPT) is another approach used with a very similar method. This model is trained to
predict the next pixel value, very similar to GPT-based NLP models. This helps the model to predict the
rest of the image with given initial pixels. Figure 16.4 shows a demonstration from the OpenAI website:

Figure 16.4 – ImageGPT

Vision transformers

The Detection Transformer (DETR) model is used for tasks such as object detection. This architecture
uses convolution in combination with transformer blocks. A backbone is used to create the 2D
representation of the images. These 2D vector representations of images are passed to a transformer
encoder block, which is later followed by a decoder block. The decoder block here is used to create
the respective object detection outputs. For each object, a query vector is also given to the decoder
block to help it predict which objects are present in the image:

Figure 16.5 – Detection Transformer

Transformer-based models for vision perform more or less the same as CNN-based models. The most
important point is the representation scheme used for these kinds of models. Models that are capable
of representing text and images in the same form (token-based and patch-based) can unleash many
use cases compared to CNN-based models, which see images as pixels and text as tokens. Multimodal
learning, which is covered in Chapter 17, focuses on multimodal models, and you will learn more
about multimodal models that are capable of understanding or generating more than one modality
in that chapter. On the other hand, compared to CNN-based models, these models can learn more
than one task at the same time more efficiently and they can be used to create foundation models for
this scope. Foundation models for vision are those that are created by pretraining models on large
amounts of data, very similar to language models.
So far, you have learned about the basics of vision-based transformers. You have also gained knowledge
about different approaches in this field.
In the next section, we will take a deeper look at how to use them for image classification.

391

392

Vision Transformers

Image classification using transformers
ViT is a good option for classifying images using transformers. Pretrained models for this transformer
model already exist and it is very easy and convenient to use them. Follow these steps:
1.

To use ViT, you can simply import it from the transformers library and load the preprocessor
and the model itself:
from transformers import (
    ViTForImageClassification, ViTImageProcessor)
model = ViTForImageClassification.from_pretrained(
    'google/vit-base-patch16-224')
processor = ViTImageProcessor.from_pretrained(
    'google/vit-base-patch16-224')

2.

You also need to load the image. In our case, we will download and load a sample image:
from PIL import Image
import requests
url = 'http://images.cocodataset.org/val2017/000000439715.jpg'
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

This will load a sample image from the coco dataset.
3.

Using a preprocessor, you need to convert the format of the image to the desired format that
is suitable for ViT:
inputs = processor(images=image, return_tensors="pt")

4.

Now, you can easily pass the image to the model and get the output as probabilities of classes:
outputs = model(inputs.pixel_values)

5.

Just like most of the classification approaches based on deep learning and softmax, you need
to use argmax to get the class ID of the highest probable class:
prediction = outputs.logits.argmax(-1)

6.

Now, you can even print out the class name using the predefined function of this model:
print("Class label: ", model.config.id2label[prediction.item()])

7.

The output will be as follows:
Class label: bearskin, busby, shako

Semantic segmentation and object detection using transformers

Up to this point, you have learned how to use ViT, excluding the training phase on your own dataset,
which we will cover here as well. If you want to train this classification model on your own dataset, it
is important to note that you need to convert the image dataset using the same preprocessor so it is
in the right format for the model to be processed.
Semantic segmentation and object detection are other tasks for computer vision, which you will learn
about in the next section.

Semantic segmentation and object detection using
transformers
In this section, we will focus on two important computer vision tasks: semantic segmentation and
object detection. You will learn how to perform these using transformers.
Models such as DETR are capable of detecting objects and semantic segmentation. These tasks are
simple and convenient using a pretrained model from transformers.
Using DETR, you can also detect the objects present in an image. Follow these steps:
1.

You need to load the model and preprocessor as follows:
from transformers import (
    DetrImageProcessor, DetrForObjectDetection)
import torch
from PIL import Image
import requests
processor = DetrImageProcessor.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/detr-resnet-50")
model = DetrForObjectDetection.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/detr-resnet-50")

2.

The next step is to download the example image and convert it:
url = "http://images.cocodataset.org/val2017/000000439715.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

3.

Giving the downloaded image to the model will create the respective output, known as a
bounding box:
inputs = processor(images=image, return_tensors="pt")
outputs = model(**inputs)

393

394

Vision Transformers

4.

You can decide which threshold to apply for each bounding box. In this example, we will use
0.9, which means any detected object above this threshold will be kept:
target_sizes = torch.tensor([image.size[::-1]])
results = processor.post_process_object_detection(
    outputs, target_sizes=target_sizes, threshold=0.9)[0]

5.

You can print the results using this code:
for score, label, box in zip(results["scores"],
    results["labels"], results["boxes"]):
    box = [round(i, 2) for i in box.tolist()]
    print(
        f"Detected {model.config.id2label[label.item()]} \
with confidence "
        f"{round(score.item(), 3)} at location {box}"
    )

6.

The results will be shown as follows:
Detected person with confidence 0.979 at location [514.99,
278.84, 562.75, 351.12]
Detected person with confidence 0.987 at location [387.75,
271.46, 414.89, 305.16]
Detected person with confidence 0.983 at location [561.75,
273.8, 597.74, 368.74]
Detected umbrella with confidence 0.938 at location [327.71,
238.32, 414.96, 276.72]
Detected person with confidence 0.982 at location [48.85, 275.8,
79.67, 345.96]
Detected person with confidence 0.997 at location [250.06,
162.47, 336.12, 398.63]
Detected person with confidence 0.995 at location [114.22,
268.76, 147.84, 399.37]
Detected horse with confidence 0.999 at location [130.74,
237.92, 467.25, 478.41]
Detected person with confidence 0.994 at location [402.1, 273.0,
461.29, 345.74]
Detected umbrella with confidence 0.963 at location [326.78,
230.8, 397.81, 261.1]
Detected person with confidence 0.984 at location [354.0,
267.42, 388.52, 298.78]
Detected umbrella with confidence 0.992 at location [508.45,
266.96, 572.54, 295.99]

Semantic segmentation and object detection using transformers

7.

However, these results are very inconvenient and not easy to understand. A better way is to
use this function and visualize them:
COLORS = [
    [0.0, 0.5, 0.8],
    [0.9, 0.3, 0.1],
    [0.9, 0.6, 0.1],
    [0.4, 0.1, 0.5],
    [0.4, 0.6, 0.1],
    [0.3, 0.7, 0.9]
]
def visualize_prediction(pil_img, output_dict, threshold):
    keep = output_dict["scores"] > threshold
    boxes = output_dict["boxes"][keep].tolist()
    scores = output_dict["scores"][keep].tolist()
    labels = output_dict["labels"][keep].tolist()
    labels = [model.config.id2label[x] for x in labels]

    plt.figure(figsize=(8, 5))
    plt.imshow(pil_img)
    ax = plt.gca()
    colors = COLORS * 100
    for score, (xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax), label,
        color in zip(scores, boxes, labels, colors):
        ax.add_patch(plt.Rectangle((xmin, ymin), xmax - xmin,
            ymax - ymin, fill=False, color=color, linewidth=3))
        ax.text(xmin, ymin, label, fontsize=8,
            bbox=dict(facecolor="yellow", alpha=0.5))
    plt.axis("off")
    plt.show()

8.

You can easily call this function:
visualize_prediction(image, results, 0.9)

As a result, you will see the following image:

395

396

Vision Transformers

Figure 16.6 – DETR object detection

As you can see from the image, objects are detected and annotated by the model.
Similarly, you can use this model for semantic segmentation as well. Semantic segmentation is the
process of labeling each pixel and assigning them to the classes. While object detection deals with
objects in bounding boxes, semantic segmentation creates a selection of the objects in a pixel-wise
manner. Follow these steps:
1.

The first thing you need to do is to load your model:
from transformers import (DetrFeatureExtractor,
DetrForSegmentation)
processor = DetrFeatureExtractor.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/detr-resnet-50-panoptic")
model = DetrForSegmentation.from_pretrained(
    "facebook/detr-resnet-50-panoptic")

Semantic segmentation and object detection using transformers

2.

The next step is to download the image that we want to perform segmentation on:
import io
import requests
from PIL import Image
import torch
import numpy
url = "https://farm4.staticflickr.
com/3487/3925656789_1b64654c91_z.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

Now that we have the image, we can use processor and model to get the output:
inputs = processor(images=image, return_tensors="pt")
outputs = model(**inputs)

Afterwards, you need to use the following functions to extract the result:
processed_sizes = torch.as_tensor(
inputs["pixel_values"].shape[-2:]).unsqueeze(0)
result = feature_extractor.post_process_panoptic(
    outputs, processed_sizes)[0]

However, in order to see the image, you can execute the following code:
import itertools
import io
import seaborn as sns
import numpy
from transformers.image_transforms import rgb_to_id, id_to_rgb
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
palette = itertools.cycle(sns.color_palette())
panoptic_seg = Image.open(io.BytesIO(result['png_string']))
panoptic_seg = numpy.array(panoptic_seg,
dtype=numpy.uint8).copy()
panoptic_seg_id = rgb_to_id(panoptic_seg)
panoptic_seg[:, :, :] = 0
for id in range(panoptic_seg_id.max() + 1):
    panoptic_seg[panoptic_seg_id == id] = \
        numpy.asarray(next(palette)) * 255
plt.figure(figsize=(15,15))
plt.imshow(panoptic_seg)
plt.axis('off')
plt.show()

397

398

Vision Transformers

3.

This code will convert the output of the model into the proper format to be visualized. Finally,
you can see the image as shown in Figure 16.7, which is the identical semantically segmented
image of the original image:

Figure 16.7 – Semantic segmentation result (left) and original image (right)

Up to this point, you have learned how to use ViT models for image classification, object detection,
and semantic segmentation. In the next section, you will learn about visual prompt models and how
to use them.

Visual prompt models
Prompt-based models have been an attractive part of artificial intelligence in many aspects. These
kinds of models can take guidance in the form of a pattern and create the respective output by
understanding it. The prompt can be in many forms or data formats. Textual prompt-based models
or visual prompt-based models are also available. A textual prompt is a free text that indicates what
the model should do or provide as output. Similarly, a visual prompt is a visual guidance that helps
the model understand the task or the instruction itself.
Models such as CLIP are capable of understanding images and text at the same time and mapping
them to a single vector space. In this vector space, text with similar semantic meaning to images (that
visually present the same described objects or scenes in the text) are closer together. A simple approach
to use more capabilities of the models is to ground them by using some external data. For example,
imagine that you are not trying to search for an image but, instead, for a specific object inside an
image. This can be easily done using semantic segmentation or even object detection but, in our case,
the text is in free format. This means that a specific user is free to write anything and is not limited by
some existing objects that the model already knows or has been trained on. In this case, approaches
such as visual prompting or textual prompting are very useful.

Visual prompt models

CLIPSeg is one of these methods that presents an approach using text and visual prompts. Figure 16.8
shows how this model works:

Figure 16.8 – CLIPSeg

As you can see in Figure 16.8, CLIPSeg is a decoder that is trained on CLIP visual and text transformers.
This decoder takes two different outputs: one as the original image and the second as support, which
can be text or another image. Follow these steps:
1.

To use this approach, you need to download a sample image. In our case, we will use the
previous image from Figure 16.7:
from PIL import Image
import requests
url = "https://farm4.staticflickr.
com/3487/3925656789_1b64654c91_z.jpg"
image = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

2.

Now that we have the image, we can load the model:
from transformers import (CLIPSegProcessor,
CLIPSegForImageSegmentation)
processor = CLIPSegProcessor.from_pretrained(
"CIDAS/clipseg-rd64-refined")
model = CLIPSegForImageSegmentation.from_pretrained(
"CIDAS/clipseg-rd64-refined")

399

400

Vision Transformers

3.

For text prompting, we can use a set of textual descriptions of the objects that we are aiming
to find:
prompts = ["hat","ball","player", "red shirt"]
inputs = processor(text=prompts, images=[image] * len(prompts),
    padding="max_length", return_tensors="pt")

4.

Now that we have the prompts and respective inputs ready for the model, we can create the outputs:
outputs = model(**inputs)
preds = outputs.logits.unsqueeze(1)

5.

We can also easily show the predicted segmentation for each of them:
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
_, ax = plt.subplots(1, 5, figsize=(15, 4))
[a.axis('off') for a in ax.flatten()]
ax[0].imshow(image)
[ax[i+1].imshow(torch.sigmoid(preds[i][0])) for i in range(4)];
[ax[i+1].text(0, -15, prompts[i]) for i in range(4)];

You will see the output in Figure 16.9:

Figure 16.9 – CLIPSeg text prompt outputs

This is just one way of using this model, textual prompting. We can use visual prompts as input as
well. Let’s do that next:
1.

Imagine that we have an image of a baseball ball and we want to search for the ball:
url = "https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/1/1e/
Baseball_%28crop%29.jpg"
prompt = Image.open(requests.get(url, stream=True).raw)

Summary

2.

Now that we have the image of the ball, we can encode the image and prompt and then condition
the model according to the prompt:
encoded_image = processor(images=[image], return_tensors="pt")
encoded_prompt = processor(images=[prompt], return_tensors="pt")
outputs = model(**encoded_image,
    conditional_pixel_values = encoded_prompt.pixel_values)

3.

Now that we have the outputs, we can visualize them:
preds = outputs.logits.unsqueeze(1)
preds = torch.transpose(preds, 0, 1)
_, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(6, 4))
[a.axis('off') for a in ax.flatten()]
ax[0].imshow(image)
ax[1].imshow(torch.sigmoid(preds[0]))

4.

The result is shown in Figure 16.10:

Figure 16.10 – CLIPSeg

As seen in the segmented image, a ball and some other related parts such as a bat are highlighted.
You have now learned how to use different methods such as CLIPSeg, semantic segmentation, and
object detection using different visual transformer models.

Summary
In this chapter, you have learned about vision transformers and how to use them for various tasks.
Semantic segmentation, object detection, and classification were a few of these tasks. You also gained
knowledge about text and visual prompt models, which can take a prompt as input and provide the
outputs. Models such as DETR, ViT, and CLIPSeg were described in this chapter.
In the next chapter, you will learn about multimodal models, such as Stable Diffusion, and how
they work.

401

17
Multimodal Generative
Transformers
Models that can understand more than one type of input are called multimodal models. Multimodal
learning has been one of the important fields of artificial intelligence (AI) and has attracted many
researchers for a long time. Even today, these multimodal models are popular in various forms and
shapes. In this chapter, we will learn about generative AI using multimodal models, especially textto-image and text-to-music ones. You will learn about Stable Diffusion and how it works. Also, you
will gain knowledge about MusicGen and AudioGen models.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Multimodal learning
• Stable Diffusion for text-to-image generation
• Music generation using MusicGen
• Text-to-speech generation using transformers

Technical requirements
The following libraries/packages are required to successfully complete this chapter:
• Anaconda
• transformers 4.0.0
• pytorch 1.0.2
• tensorflow 2.4.0
All notebooks containing the coding exercises are available at the following GitHub link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

404

Multimodal Generative Transformers

Multimodal learning
In a broad sense, multimodal learning is the learning process that takes place using different modalities
in the context of machine learning. A modality in machine learning is the type of data that we put
into the model. Typical types of modalities include textual, visual (image and video), and auditory
(sound, voice, and music) data.
A good example of such models is contrastive language-image pretraining (CLIP), which can
represent textual and visual data in the same space. We can create different applications using this
representation. For example, we can create vector representations of the images and text, both obtained
from the same dataset and create a classifier on top. In Figure 17.1, you can see a multimodal approach
to predicting phone prices using features such as the camera, RAM, battery, and an image of the device.

Figure 17.1 – Multimodal price prediction (image courtesy of https://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40745-021-00326-z)

Another example is price prediction using an image of the product, its features, and a textual description
of it. In this example, we have more than two modalities. Fusing these modalities such that the model
can understand them and create the best possible output is always a significant issue in this field. As
you can see in Figure 17.1, a multimodal approach is proposed to predict the price of mobile phones.

Stable Diffusion for text-to-image generation

Multimodal learning does not always focus on understanding the data in different modalities; it also
involves getting the input from one modality and generating the output in another one. In this sense,
image captioning can be considered a form of multimodal learning because the input is visual data,
while the output is textual.
Previous approaches for fusing different features from different modalities included a process of
weighting manually or training the fusion weights. However, newer approaches tackle this issue by
converting all the features into the same or a very similar feature space. For example, a text-vision
multimodal model creates patches for images that are seen as tokens similar to text tokens. These visual
and text tokens are then represented in a similar way to each other, and instead of giving different
modalities to the model, the model sees them in the same way.
In the next subsection, you will learn more about generative multimodal AI, which is capable of getting
input in one modality and generating output in another.

Generative multimodal AI
Generative AI or GenAI, which has recently drawn attention from across the world, involves AI models
that are capable of generating output. This does not mean that other models do not generate output
(something that applies to all AI models). Generative AI emphasizes models that can understand the
underlying patterns of training data and generate new data accordingly.
Generative AI has existed for many years, but it has not attracted much public attention because we
have little control over its generated outputs. Even if we had control over it, we could not specify exactly
what we wanted it to generate. Even if we could have had control over it and had been able to specify
what we wanted, this specification process was not easily understood by humans.
More recent models get the description of what we want to generate in text form, and there are even
other types of models that accept input in the form of images or voice as well. This enables new
technologies to be used more easily by the vast majority of people rather than only a handpicked set
of researchers.
In the next section, we will provide a detailed explanation of how Stable Diffusion works with textto-image generation and then see how it can be used for image generation in action.

Stable Diffusion for text-to-image generation
Text-to-image generation is a widely adopted use case of generative AI. Generating images from text,
especially high-quality images, has lots of use cases from game design to marketing. However, in order
to understand how this specific kind of model works, we need to first understand a few preliminaries
about diffusion models in machine learning.

405

406

Multimodal Generative Transformers

Diffusion in AI is a term borrowed from physics. The notion of physical reactions that include
dissolved materials such as ink in water also applies here to AI. For example, take an ordinary image
as our starting point. Forward diffusion is the process of adding noise to the image. As seen in the
following figure, this process will turn any image into noise (with a level of noise added to the image)
that gradually makes the image indistinguishable from the original one.

Figure 17.2 – Forward diffusion

This forward process will give us a different version of the same image that we can use to train a model
to reverse the process by removing the noise. This is a very efficient technique to create very realistic
images. However, there is a major consideration that comes with this approach: It is very slow. You
must remove the noise in an image step by step. This process is also called sampling: in each step, the
noisy image is given to a model, the model predicts noisy pixels, and the noise is subtracted from the
image. This iterative process continues and at the end, you get the image starting from pure noise to
a realistic one.
A scheduler, on the other hand, controls the amount of noise added to the image. The scheduler follows
a pattern, adding a certain amount of noise to the image at each step. This ensures that a certain pattern
of noise volume is followed during the entire process.
Another faster approach that Stable Diffusion uses is Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs). A VAE is
a type of model that first compresses the input and then tries to decompress it. Figure 17.3 shows a
typical VAE:

Figure 17.3 – VAE

Stable Diffusion in action

VAEs work much faster because instead of directly applying noise to the image, they apply noise to
the latent-space representation of the image. Latent space is much smaller in terms of size compared
to the original image. The process can be reformulated as generating noise with a specific scheduler
constraint in a latent-space representation of the same size as the image and adding it to the image.
The process just explained is a way of generating images. But as mentioned previously, if you do not
have any control over the process, it could only be used to randomly generate images. To resolve this,
a text encoder (CLIP as an example) is used to encode text into a dense vector. This dense vector is
then used to guide UNet (a convolutional neural network) during the denoising and decoding process.
So far, you have learned about Stable Diffusion and how it works. In the next section, you will learn
how you can use it to generate images.

Stable Diffusion in action
In this section, you will learn how to use Stable Diffusion in action. This is done via the utilization of
diffusers and transformers and is very easy and convenient.
In order to use Stable Diffusion in the easiest way, you first need to install the following libraries:
pip install diffusers transformers accelerate safetensors

diffusers is the library we will use to load Stable Diffusion models:
import torch
from diffusers import (
    StableDiffusionPipeline, DPMSolverMultistepScheduler)
model_id = "stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1"
pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(model_id,
    torch_dtype=torch.float16)
pipe.scheduler = DPMSolverMultistepScheduler.from_config(
    pipe.scheduler.config)
pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

Now your pipeline is ready and you can easily use it:
prompt = " hyperrealistic portrait of unicorn"
image = pipe(prompt).images[0]

The generated image will be something like Figure 17.4:

407

408

Multimodal Generative Transformers

Figure 17.4 – Stable Diffusion output

The unicorn in the preceding image is not as realistic as expected, but nonetheless, the quality of the
generated image is not bad at all. Maybe a bit of prompt engineering will help:
"hyperrealistic portrait of unicorn, cosmic survival, Hyper quality,
photography, digital art"

The next output shows how prompt engineering can improve the result.

Figure 17.5 – Stable Diffusion output with a new prompt

The preceding output is the best I could get with a bit of prompt engineering, but I am sure you will
be able to generate better ones. Maybe this is why the prompt-engineering hype came about.

Music generation using MusicGen

Stable Diffusion is not only controlled using textual prompts but can also be controlled using another
image as a source of generation. Newer techniques applied on top of Stable Diffusion, such as ControlNet,
are used to provide this capability.
In simpler words, ControlNet controls Stable Diffusion by conditioning it to a specific input. Examples
of this functionality are scribbles, edge maps, pose key points, depth maps, segmentation maps, and
normal maps.

Music generation using MusicGen
Large language models have been very successful in many fields. The idea of using a large model
(typically a transformer) for other tasks is also very interesting. For example, we can create a large
music model that can take text prompts as input and generate music as output. MusicGen is one of
the models in this field.
Using MusicGen with the help of audiocraft is very easy. You need to follow these steps:
1.

First, install the audiocraft library:
pip install -U audiocraft

2.

The next step is to load the model and set the generation duration for the music:
from audiocraft.models import musicgen
import torch
model = musicgen.MusicGen.get_pretrained('medium',
device='cuda')
model.set_generation_params(duration=8)

3.

Finally, you can pass the prompts to it and it will generate the music. You can also listen to it
in your Colab environment:
generated_music = model.generate([
    '80s rock music with drums and electric guitar',
    '90s retro action game music'],
    progress=True)

4.

You can easily listen to it using the following code:
from audiocraft.utils.notebook import display_audio
display_audio(generated_music, 32000)

Generating music with different prompts can be really fun! Imagine how you could use this generated
music for your creative work. You could make lots of music for a game you are developing, or you could
even create an application where users can generate music and share it with each other. MusicGen
also supports audio prompts as well. This means you can give it a sample of a specific music track and
change its style or even use it as a base on which to create different versions.

409

410

Multimodal Generative Transformers

In the next step, you will learn how you can use speech generation models.

Text-to-speech generation using transformers
Text-to-speech generation has been always an important part of AI agents, which usually need to
talk to the user at some point. Using transformers for this specific task is also helpful. They can learn
how to replicate different voices as well. This specific topic is not a new one, but the advances in this
field are ongoing.
BARK (as in, a dog’s bark!) is one of the most successful models in this field. This model can generate
realistic human voices along with background noise, music, and sound effects. It is multilingual and
also supports multiple speakers. Its usage is very simple with transformers:
1.

First, you need to import transformers:
from transformers import AutoProcessor, AutoModel

2.

The processor and model should be loaded next. The processor is required for processing input:
processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained("suno/bark")
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained("suno/bark")

3.

Now, you can use the processor and model to create the speech. Be aware that you can use
special tokens such as [clears throat] or [laughs] to create effects during the speech:
inputs = processor(
    text=["Hi! My name is Meysam. I like TRANSFORMERS [laughs]
I mean, I really like it [clears throat] I have been working
in field on NLP (Natural Language Processing) for almost a
decade"],
    return_tensors="pt",
)
speech = model.generate(**inputs, do_sample=True)

4.

You can easily listen to the generated audio from your Colab:
from IPython.display import Audio
Audio(speech.cpu().numpy().squeeze(),
    rate=model.generation_config.sample_rate)

So far, you have learned how to generate images, music, and speech. These models are very useful
for content creators. Any content creator can use them to generate eye-catching content for their
commercials, games, or other digital content.

Summary

In the next chapter, you will learn how transformers can be utilized for time-series data.

Summary
In this chapter, you learned about multimodal generative transformers. These transformers are able
to generate images, music, and speech, and new generative AI tools are being created from similar
models every day. Having read this chapter, you have learned how to use these models and how to
integrate them into your day-to-day content creation tasks.
In the next chapter, you will learn about the use of transformers in numerical and time-series data.

411

18
Revisiting Transformers
Architecture for Time Series
Transformers are well known for NLP-specific tasks. Their main power comes from their capabilities
to model time series data. This data can be textual or non-textual. In this chapter, you will learn how
to use transformers for time series data modeling and predicting. You will also learn the basics of
time series concepts and utilize a very simple model on top of that. This will give you a glance at time
series data that can be used for various predictions. Conversely, you will also learn how transformers
differ and how you apply transformer models for this scope.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
• Understanding time series concepts
• Transformers and time series data modeling

Technical requirements
The following libraries/packages are required to successfully complete this chapter:
• Anaconda
• transformers 4.0.0
• pytorch 1.0.2
• tensorflow 2.4.0
All notebooks with coding exercises will be available at the following GitHub link: https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/Mastering-Transformers-Second-Edition.

414

Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series

Understanding time series concepts
Time series data is typically a collection of observations measured by specific methods that are related
in terms of measurement intervals. This data can come from physical or non-physical measurements.
For example, room temperature can be measured using a physical device and specific time intervals.
Figure 18.1 shows an example measurement.

Figure 18.1 – A room temperature measurement and time series representation

Given the data measured from a specific source, different ML tasks can be applied based on the task
itself. For example, given a specific time frame, future predictions can be seen as a task, and even with
a given time series, classification can be seen as a task.
Time series prediction always has been one of the most important tasks in this field. In this specific
task, given the period, future values must be predicted. One of the most well-known examples is using
predictive analytics to predict the values of specific market assets, Bitcoin or cryptocurrency price
prediction being such an example.
Predicting the future from time series data is also known as time series regression, which learns a
statistical model from time series data. This statistical or probabilistic model is used to predict the
future with a given specific past or historical data.
Another famous task in this field is time series classification. Given a signal, this type of classifier gets
past or historical data and classifies it as a given set of classes. Take the following example – when given
a sensor measurement during a specific time of a car engine noise, a model can predict whether the
engine has issues or not. The data is also classified in the same way. From this simple example, you
can see that the measurement also affects the quality of the data. Time series data, as stated before, is
commonly measurements from physical or non-physical phenomena. Speaking in terms of physics
and measurement, this can come with a noise or not. Noise during measurement is a common issue,
and it can be a result of failure from sensors or different elements as well. For a good classifier or
regression model, it is important to overcome this issue.

Transformers and time series modeling

Simpler approaches, such as a moving-average model, have been proposed for time series data.
However, these types of models are not capable of reflecting information passed through time series
data. Better and more sophisticated approaches such as AutoRegressive Integrated Moving Average
(ARIMA) perform better, but compared to transformers, each of them has specific shortcomings.
More innovative approaches in this field are also proposed by different types of data modeling. For
example, to predict the future price of Bitcoin (or any other stock), you can see it as an environment
and the model as an agent. With this paradigm, reinforcement learning approaches can be applied as
well. The agent can buy, sell, or keep the assets, and at each time stamp, it has to decide what to do.
Training will start with an exploration of the environment for the agent to see what the consequences
of the actions are. After learning the consequences, a policy will be shaped for the agent, which will
help them to understand what the best action to take is. The next step would be the exploitation of
what has been learned so far. The agent will use whatever it has learned to achieve more rewards.
This approach might not apply to all types of time series problems, but it is important to know what
the best type of modeling is.
Transformers, conversely, as described in the entire book so far, are one of the best tools to understand
sequential data, as they have shown their superiority in NLP. Different approaches have been proposed
for time series prediction using transformers, including Transformer, Informer, LogFormer,
Reformer, and AutoFormer, each having advantages and disadvantages.
In the next section, you will learn how to use Transformers for time series data modeling further,
using them either for classification or prediction. You will also learn the basics of the idea behind this
application and how it can be applied.

Transformers and time series modeling
Before jumping into transformers for time series modeling, it is helpful to understand basic approaches
such as the moving average. This approach takes a window of historical data and applies an average
to find the future value. Then, it continues to iterate over the data and find the next value using the
next steps:
1.

In order to illustrate this approach, we first need to get the data using yfinance, and then
install the package:
pip install yfinance

2.

Then, you can easily fetch the data:
import yfinance as yf
btc_ticker = yf.Ticker("BTC-USD")
btc_data = btc_ticker.history(period="max")

The data will be fetched, and you can easily see it by printing out the variable:
btc_data

415

416

Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series

It will show you a nice pandas DataFrame, as shown in Figure 18.2.

Figure 18.2 – Historical Bitcoin data

3.

You can also easily visualize it with the following code:
from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
plt.plot(btc_data.Close)
plt.show()

The results are shown in Figure 18.3.

Figure 18.3 – A historical Bitcoin data visualization

Transformers and time series modeling

4.

Now, you can easily apply the moving average to the data:
btc_data["moving_average"] = \
btc_data["Close"].rolling(10).mean()

5.

You can also use the following command to visualize it:
btc_data[['Close','moving_average']].plot()

The results are shown in Figure 18.4.

Figure 18.4 – A historical Bitcoin data and moving average visualization

As you can see from the visualization, the moving average looks at the future, but it is not always
the best method. In order to see how far its predictions are from the actual values, you can use error
metrics such as Mean Squared Error (MSE) and see the difference. The difference is high because it
is only concerned with the values of the past window, which, in our case, in size of 10. This means it
just takes the values of 10 steps (timestamps) before and finds the average value. This value is accepted
as a future value. However, this specific phenomenon, or similar time series ones, are not as simple as
they seem. Many external and internal market parameters are involved, and they sometimes follow
specific patterns. A simple model such as the moving average is not capable of capturing such patterns.
Conversely, it is not capable of moving too much into the future because if any error is introduced
in the past, it will be propagated to the future, sometimes with a higher magnitude and sometimes
with a lower magnitude:

417

418

Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series

1.

We can assume that our goal is to just predict the next value; with the given predictions and
actual values, we can calculate the MSE:
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error
mean_squared_error(btc_data["Close"][9:],
btc_data["moving_average"][9:])

2.

The result, as you can see, is an extremely high number:
1783634.925773145

Also, there is another drawback to methods such as moving average, which occurs when missing
values are present. Such methods are incapable of handling missing values, and certain methods to
deal with them were introduced, such as replacing them with previous values, the mean value of the
window, or even zero. But each of these approaches has issues as well.
Transformers can handle missing values similar to how BERT handles mask tokens. Let’s start with
an easy example, where we will aim to classify the next-day price of Bitcoin as higher or lower than
the previous day. You can think of this example as a simple approach to identifying buying or selling
orders. In this example, we will also implement our own transformer model for time series classification
and see how it performs:
1.

First, we need to start by transforming a dataset into the desired format. Initial Bitcoin prices
are in the form of daily close values (in US dollars); for each sample, we will get the past 30
days’ data, and the prediction needs to be for the next day after this period.

2.

The easiest way is to apply a rolling window over the entire data with a 31-day period:
dataset_x = []
dataset_y = []
for j in range(0,30):
    for i in range(j,btc_data.shape[0], 31):
        if btc_data[i:i+31].Close.shape[0] == 31:
            dataset_y.append(
                1 if btc_data[i:i+30].Close.mean() <
                btc_data.iloc[i+30].Close else 0)
        mean_ = btc_data[i:i+30].Close.mean()
        std_ = btc_data[i:i+30].Close.std()
        dataset_x.append(
list((btc_data[i:i+30].Close - mean_ ) / std_))

3.

This code will create a series of windows, each starting from 0–30 indices, for each series of
windows. It also creates rolling windows and finds the ground truth value for prediction using
a simple fact – if the mean value of the previous 30 days is lower than the predicted value, the
model should predict 0; otherwise, it should predict 1. Also, the values of the entire window
are normalized to make training the model easier.

Transformers and time series modeling

4.

Now, you can convert your dataset to NumPy:
import numpy as np
dataset_x = np.array(dataset_x)
dataset_y = np.array(dataset_y)
And respectively, create train and test sets:
train_x, test_x = dataset_x[:3000], dataset_x[3000:]
train_y, test_y = dataset_y[:3000], dataset_y[3000:]

5.

Now that everything is ready, we can create our model, but remember that it should be a
transformer-based one, so we need to first implement the transformer encoder:
def encoder(inputs, head_size, num_heads,
    feed_forward_dimension, dropout=0):
    # Attention layer
    x = layers.MultiHeadAttention(
        key_dim=head_size, num_heads=num_heads, dropout=dropout
    )(inputs, inputs)
    x = layers.Dropout(dropout)(x)
    x = layers.LayerNormalization(epsilon=1e-6)(x)
    attention_result = x + inputs
    # Convlution as feedforward
    x = layers.Conv1D(filters=feed_forward_dimension,
        kernel_size=1, activation="relu")(attention_result)
    x = layers.Dropout(dropout)(x)
    x = layers.Conv1D(filters=inputs.shape[-1],
kernel_size=1)(x)
    x = layers.LayerNormalization(epsilon=1e-6)(x)
    return x + attention_result

This function creates the encoder of the transformer.
6.

Next, we create the actual model using this block:
def build_model(
    input_size,
    head_size,
    num_heads,
    ff_dim,
    num_transformer_blocks,
    dense_units,
    dropout=0,
    dense_dropout=0,
):

419

420

Revisiting Transformers Architecture for Time Series

    inputs = keras.Input(shape=input_size)
    x = inputs
    for _ in range(num_transformer_blocks):
        x = encoder(x, head_size, num_heads, ff_dim, dropout)
    x = layers.GlobalAveragePooling1D(
        data_format="channels_first")(x)
    for d in dense_units:
        x = layers.Dense(d, activation="relu")(x)
        x = layers.Dropout(dense_dropout)(x)
    outputs = layers.Dense(n_classes, activation="softmax")(x)
    return keras.Model(inputs, outputs)

7.

Based on our data, we can create a model using this function:
model = build_model(
    x_train.shape[1:],
    head_size=256,
    num_heads=4,
    ff_dim=4,
    dropout=0.25,
    num_transformer_blocks=4,
    dense_units=[128],
    dense_dropout=0.4
)

8.

Then, we can compile the model and see the summary:
model.compile(
    loss="sparse_categorical_crossentropy",
    optimizer=keras.optimizers.Adam(learning_rate=1e-4),
    metrics=["sparse_categorical_accuracy"],
)
model.summary()

9.

As a result, you see the following summary at the end:
Total params: 93130 (363.79 KB)
Trainable params: 93130 (363.79 KB)
Non-trainable params: 0 (0.00 Byte)

10. Now that we have the model ready and the data is in proper format, we can train it:
callbacks = [keras.callbacks.EarlyStopping(
    patience=5, restore_best_weights=True)]

Summary

model.fit(
    x_train,
    y_train,
    epochs=5,
    batch_size=64,
    callbacks=callbacks,
)

Specific fallbacks are important to have – for example, early stopping is very useful to apply; it
will stop the model from training at earlier stages if loss increases.
11. We can also evaluate the model:
model.evaluate(x_test, y_test, verbose=1)

As you can see, after only a few epochs and with just a few data samples, we can achieve good results.
Apart from classification, you can also change the same model to predict the next value with very small
modifications. Instead of applying classification, you can use the direct value with sigmoid activation.
On the other side, you can change the loss function to MSE. Also, another slight change needs to be
applied to ground truth values that need to be predicted.

Summary
In this chapter, you have learned the basics of time series data and how to apply transformers to them.
Transformers can be applied to time series data, ranging from modeling the data to predicting the
next value in time. However, it is important to also note that, based on the data, transformers can be
a great choice because they can deal with unknown values in time series that most models are not
capable of doing.
Through this book, you learned how to apply transformers to different tasks, including NLP, computer
vision, times series, and multimodal tasks. You also learned how to deploy them, how to create inference
services, how large language models work, and how you can get the best out of them. Transformers
have dominated the AI industry so far, better than any other architecture. Generative AI (GenAI)
is also one of the fascinating, fast-growing AI features that have been adopted by the industry and
community so quickly. You also learned many aspects of it and grasped a deeper understanding of
how it works.

421

Index
A

application programming
interfaces (APIs) 359

AdapterFusion 234
adapter tuning
used, for fine-tuning BERT
checkpoint 237-241

dockerizing 364
used, for accessing datasets 47-50
AR models
used, for NLG 120-122
artificial intelligence (AI) 3, 39, 403
attention heads
interpreting 272, 273
visualizing, with exBERT 273-278
attention head view 279-282
attention mechanism 14-16
audiocraft 409
augmentation
used, for boosting IMDB text
classification 216-221

adaptive learning
benefits 227, 228
additive methods 235
A Lite BERT (ALBERT) 81-84
Amazon Polarity 200
Amazon SageMaker
reference link 372
Anaconda 30
installing, on Linux 31
installing, on macOS 34
installing, on Windows 32-34
transformer, installing with 30
Anaconda for Linux
download link 31
Anaconda for macOS
download link 34
Anaconda for Windows
download link 32
anaphoric relations 282

Autoencoder (AE) 100
autoencoding language model 65, 81
training, for language 70-80
Auto Regressive (AR) 100
AutoRegressive Integrated Moving
Average (ARIMA) 415
average word embeddings 196
Aya-101 353

424

Index

B
backpropagation 135, 136
back-translation 216
Bactrian-x 353
Bag-of-Words (BoW) 7
BARK 410
batch 56
Benchmark Data for Turkish
Text Categorization
reference link 139
benchmarking examples
references 60
benchmarks 44
GLUE 45
SQuAD 47
SuperGLUE 46
working with 44
XGLUE 46
XTREME 46
BERT language model pretraining tasks 66
BERTopic
used, for topic modeling 203-205
BertViz
used, for multiscale visualization
of attention heads 278, 279
Bidirectional and Auto-regressive
Transformer (BART) 112-114
using, for zero-shot learning 190-193
Bidirectional Encoder Representations
from Transformers (BERT)
model 5, 23, 29, 66, 100, 106, 233
fine-tuning, for multi-class classification
with custom datasets 139-145
fine-tuning, for sentence-pair
regression 145-150
fine-tuning, for single-sentence
binary classification 127-134

BERT checkpoint 67, 68, 70
fine-tuning, with adapter tuning 237-241
bi-encoder
architecture 186
versus cross-encoder 185, 186
BigBird 297, 310, 317-320
bigram models 9
BIO 161
BitFit 236
bitsandbytes 297, 326
for easier quantization 326, 327
BLEU 131
Blockwise Pattern 310
BLOOM (175B) 257
Bloomz 353
BM25 information retrieval models 5
Boolean model 205
bounding box 393
byte-level BPE (BBPE) 91
Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) 10,
67, 90, 91, 117, 166, 329
training 93-96

C
catastrophic forgetting 227, 234
causal language modeling (CLM) 330
CC BY 4.0 DEED
reference link 26
central processing unit (CPU) 29, 384
centroids 201
character-level augmentation 214
character-level subwords 91
Chatbots 3
ChatGPT 101, 258
Classification (CLS) 5, 272
classification model
training, with native PyTorch 134-139

Index

CLIPSeg 399
cloze test 66
combined pattern 309
command-line interface (CLI) 35, 362
comma-separated values (CSV) 54
CommonCrawl 334
URL 70
community
trained models, sharing with 80, 81
community-provided models
working with 39-42
context fragmentation 105
contextual word embeddings 6, 13
context vector 6
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training
(CLIP) 25, 398, 404, 407
contrastive learning 214
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) 4
corpus 70
Corpus of Linguistic Acceptability
(CoLA) 45
cross-encoder
disadvantages 186
versus bi-encoder 185, 186
cross-encoding 186
cross-lingual classification 344-348
cross-lingual language model
(XLM) 329, 332-336
Cross-Lingual Natural Language
Inference (XNLI) 329
cross-lingual relation
example 331, 332
cross-lingual similarity tasks 337-339
cross-lingual textual similarity
visualizing 340-344
Cross-lingual TRansfer Evaluation of
Multilingual Encoders (XTREME) 44

cross-lingual zero-shot learning 349-352
curse of multilingualism 354

D
data
processing, with map function 53, 54
data augmentation 213
used, for improving performance 214
Data-Efficient Image Transformer
(DeiT) 389
data manipulation, with datasets library 51
caching 52
dataset filter 53
indexing 51
local files, working with 54, 55
map function 53
reusability 52
shuffling 51
sorting 51
datasets
accessing, with application
programming interface 47-50
preparing, for model training 55, 56
working with 44
decision tree pruning 299
Decoding-Enhanced BERT with
Disentangled Attention
(DeBERTa) 87, 88
deep learning (DL) 4, 29, 272
leveraging 9
deep neural network (DNN) 10
Detection Transformer (DETR) 391
dilated attention 309
Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) 264
DistilBERT 91, 297
working with 300-302

425

426

Index

distributional semantics 7
Doc2vec 5
Document Frequency (DF) 7
document pooling 196
domain
model, adapting to 221-228
domain adaptation 213
dynamic masking 85

E
elbow method 201
ELECTRA model 87
Embeddings from Language
Models (ELMo) 6
End-of-Sentence (EOS) 117
exBERT
used, for visualizing attention heads 273-278
experiment tracking 375
explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) 271

F
Falcon(180B) 257
FastAPI Transformer model serving 360-363
faster inference
with Open Neural Network
Exchange (ONNX) 371
Faster Transformer model
serving, with TFX 365-367
FastText 9
feed-forward neural networks (FFNNs) 4
few-shot learning 183
fine-tuning 233
first-order Markov processes 9
FISH Mask 236

FLAIR
used, for semantic similarity
experiment 193-195
FLAIRAPI 196
FLAN-T5
fine-tuning, for NLI task with Lora 241-251
Flask 360
forward propagation 135
frequently asked questions (FAQs) 205
full fine-tuning 233
full model fine-tuning 233
full parameter fine-tuning 233
full self-attention model 307
Fundamental AI Research (FAIR) 191

G
gated recurrent units (GRUs) 12, 13, 185
General Language Understanding
Evaluation (GLUE) 44, 187
Generated Pre-trained Transformer
2 (GPT-2) 29, 99, 104
reference link 41
Generative AI/GenAI 405
Generative Language Models (GLMs) 99-101
training 115-119
working with 102
generative multimodal AI 405
Get Docker
reference link 364
global attention 308
global explanation 288
GloVe 5, 196
GLUE benchmark 45
GLUE macro scores 302
Google Colaboratory (Google Colab) 29
installing 36, 37
using 36, 37

Index

GPT-3 101
GPT-3 (175B) 257
GPT model family 102, 103
graphical user interface (GUI) 31
graphics processing unit (GPU) 29, 299, 384
grid search 228

H
head view 279
hierarchical density-based spatial
clustering of applications with
noise (HDBSCAN) 203
Hugging Face 39
hyperparameter optimization
(HPO) 213, 234, 376
used, for optimizing parameters 228-231
hyperparameters 213

I
image classification
with transformers 392, 393
ImageGPT (iGPT) 390
IMDB text classification
boosting, with augmentation 216-221
inference tasks 45
information technology (IT) 39
InstructGPT 102, 104
instruction fine-tuned embedding
models 209-211
Internet Movie Database (IMDb) 344, 376
Inverse Document Frequency (IDF) 7

J
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) 54, 122

K
kernel 326
kernel attention 326
kernelization 326
key 17
Khmer 344
knowledge distillation 299, 300

L
LaMDA 137B 101
language-agnostic bert sentence
embedding (LaBSE) 339
language generation 9
Language-Independent Named
Entity Recognition (II)
reference link 162
language modeling 9, 22
large language models
(LLMs) 4, 99, 233, 257, 258, 271
fine-tuning 263
fine-tuning, for NER 164-172
instruction 262, 263
reward function 259, 261
working with 37-39
large language models (LLMs), techniques
model quantization 264
Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) 264
TRL library 264-269
latent-Dirichlet allocation (LDA) 203
latent semantic analysis (LSA) 8
learning-based patterns 321-325
lexico-syntactic pattern 205
LIME 271
interpreting, Transformers’ decision 289-293
Linear Transformers 326

427

428

Index

Linformer 297, 326
Linux
Anaconda, installing on 31
LLaMA 258
LLaMA(65B) 257
local explanation 288
local files
working with 54, 55
Locality Sensitive Hashing
(LSH) function 321
Local Self Attention (LSA) 321
Locust
used, for load testing 368-370
Longformer 309-316
Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) 6, 12, 13, 185, 331
Low-rank Adaptation of Large Language
Models (LoRA) 235, 250
low-rank factorization 326
low-rank fine-tuning 236

M
M2M100 329, 353
machine learning (ML) 8
machine translation (MT) 99, 332
macOS
Anaconda, installing on 34
many-to-many mode 11
many-to-one mode 11
map function 53
used, for processing data 53, 54
Markov processes 9
Masked Language Modeling
(MLM) 105, 222, 330
massive multilingual translation
329, 352-354

Mean Absolute Error (MAE) 148
Mean Squared Error (MSE) 148, 417
memory-efficient backpropagation 299
memory performance
benchmarking for 56-60
Microsoft Research Paraphrase
Corpus (MRPC) 45
Mistral (7B) 257
model card 41
model decision 288, 289
model metrics
tracking 376
model quantization 264
models
adapting, to domain 221-228
fine-tuning, with run_glue.py 156, 157
model size reduction 299
implementation 300
knowledge distillation 300-302
pruning 302-304
quantization 305, 306
model training
dataset, preparing for 55, 56
tracking, with TensorBoard 376-379
model training live
tracking, with W&B 379-384
model view 279, 283-285
movement pruning
reference link 306
Moving Average (MA) 379
multi-class classification 126
multi-class classification, with
custom datasets
BERT, fine-tuning for 139-145
Multi-Genre Natural Language
Inference (MultiNLI) 45, 190
multi-head attention mechanism
15, 17-22, 274

Index

multilabel text classification 126, 150-156
multilingual bidirectional and autoregressive transformer (mBART) 329
multilingual bidirectional encoder
representations from transformers
(mBERT) 46, 329, 332, 333
Multilingual Common Crawl (mC4) 349
multilingual models
performance, fine-tuning 354-356
multilingual text-to-text transfer
transformer (mT5) 329, 349, 353
multimodal learning 24-26, 404, 405
multimodal models 403
multimodal transformers
working with 42-44
multiscale visualization, of attention heads
with BertViz 278, 279
multi-task learning 44, 102, 234
with Text-to-Text Transfer
Transformer (T5) 106, 107
multi-task training
with Text-to-Text Transfer
Transformer (T5) 107-111
MusicGen
used, for music generation 409

N
named entity recognition (NER) 11,
100, 159, 161, 162, 228, 234
language models, fine-tuning for 164-172
native PyTorch
used, for training classification
model 134-139
Natural Language Generation (NLG) 99
with AR models 120-122
natural language inference (NLI) 3, 29,
183, 192, 234, 272, 329, 335, 359, 387

Natural Language Processing
(NLP) 160, 214, 297
neural machine translation (NMT) 14
neuron view 279, 285-287
Next Sentence Prediction
(NSP) 23, 67, 284, 330
n-gram language models 5, 9
NLI task with Lora
FLAN-T5, fine-tuning for 241-251
NLP approaches
evolution 4-7
NLP libraries 108
non-negative matrix factorization
(NMF) 203
N-order Markov processes 9

O
object detection
with transformers 393-396
one-hot encoded document-term matrices 5
one-shot learning 183
one-to-many mode 11
ONNX runtime (ORT) 371
Open Book Question Answering
(OBQA) 101, 260
Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX)
used, for faster inference 371
operating system (OS) 364
Optuna 228
features 230
OPUS (Open Source Parallel Corpus) 335
out-of-memory (OOM) error 249

P
PaLM (540B) 257
Paragraph-ID 185

429

430

Index

parallel adapters 235
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning
(PEFT) 233, 234, 264
advantages 234
parameters
optimizing, with HPO 228-231
parameter sharing 299
paraphrasing 216
Part-of-Speech (POS)
tagging 100, 159, 162, 163
Passage Ranking 209
Pathways Language Model (PaLM) 233
PEFT experiments
working with 236
PEFT, types 235
additive methods 235
low-rank fine-tuning 236
selective methods 236
PEGASUS 106
Penn Treebank POS 162
performance
improving, with data augmentation 214
Performer 297, 326
Permuted Language Modeling (PLM) 105
pipeline parallelism algorithms 299
policy optimization 259
positional encoding 70
Postman
download link 362
pre-training language models (PTLMs) 258
principal component analysis (PCA) 202
probing-classifier approach 287
inner parts of BERT with 287, 288
processing 331
prompt 101
prompt engineering 258
proof-of-concept (PoC) 107
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) 264

pruning 299, 302-304
structured pruning 302
unstructured pruning 302
PyTorch 29
installing 35, 36

Q
quantization 299, 305, 306
quantized LoRA (QLoRA)
tuning with 251, 252
query 17
Question Answering (QA) 39, 159, 163, 164
applying, for NLP tasks 180, 181
with token classification 172-180
question-answering (QA) model 360
Question Answering (QA) problem 227
Question Natural Language
Inference (QNLI) 45
Quora Question Pairs (QQP) 45

R
random-access memory (RAM) 56
random attention 309
random search 228
Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) 45
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) 4, 185
Reformer 297, 310
Reformer model 321
reinforcement learning from human
feedback (RLHF) 104
reinforcement learning (RL) 258, 259, 261
requests per second (RPS) 370
reset gate 13
ResNet 389
response time (RT) 370

Index

Reversible Residual Network (RevNet) 321
reward function 259-261
Reward Modeling (RM) 264
reward model (RM) 104
RLHF paradigm
human feedback 258
self-supervised 258
supervised 258
RNN architecture
advantages 11
disadvantages 11
RNN-based document embeddings 197
RNN models
used, for considering word order 10, 11
Robustly Optimized BERT Pretraining
Approach (RoBERTa) 85-87, 188
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) 131, 148
run_glue.py
utilizing, to fine-tune models 156, 157

S
SageMaker inference 371-373
sampling 406
Sanic 360
SavedModel format
reference link 365
SBERT embeddings 197-200
seed value 52
selective methods 236
self-attention 17, 306
self-attention sparsification 299
self-explainers 288
self-supervision 214
semantic search 183
semantic segmentation
with transformers 393, 396-398

semantic similarity experiment
with FLAIR 193-195
semantic text clustering 183
Semantic Textual Similarity Benchmark
(STSB) 45, 146, 188
Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) 194
reference link 187
used, for text clustering 202
Sentence-BERT (SBERT) 183, 339
used, for semantic search 205-209
used, for text clustering 200-203
sentence embeddings 184, 185
used, for solving applications 185
sentence-level augmentation 216
examples 216
sentence order prediction (SOP) 82, 330
sentence-pair regression
BERT model, fine-tuning for 145-150
sentence piece tokenization 10, 67, 91, 92
sentence similarity models
benchmarking 187-190
sentiment analysis 127
separator (SEP) 272
sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) 6
sequential transfer learning (STL) 44
serial adapters 235
shallow 22
SHapley Additive exPlanations
(SHAP) model 271
interpreting, Transformers’ decision 293-295
Siamese network structure 186
silhouette method 201
similarity and paraphrase tasks 45
single-sentence binary classification
BERT model, fine-tuning for 127-134
single-sentence tasks 45
Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) 236

431

432

Index

SpanBERT 113
SparseAdapter 236
sparse attention
with fixed patterns 307-320
speed performance
benchmarking for 56-60
SQuAD1.1 47
SQuAD2.0 47
SQuAD benchmark 47
SQuAD dataset
reference link 260
Stable Diffusion
reference link 26
used, for text-to-image generation 405-407
working 407-409
Stable Diffusion pipeline 25
Stanford Natural Language
Inference (SNLI) Corpus

TAPAS base model fine-tuned on
WikiTable Questions (WTQ)

reference link 241
Stanford Question Answering Dataset
(SquAD) 44, 163, 227

Term Frequency (TF) 7
text categorization 126
text classification 126, 127
text clustering
with Sentence-BERT 200-203
text representation 183
text-to-image generation
Stable Diffusion for 405-407
text-to-speech generation
with transformers 410
text-to-text models
working with 106
Text-to-Text Transfer Transformer
(T5) 99, 106, 349

Stanford Sentiment Treebank (SST-2) 45
Stanford Sentiment Treebank v2 (sst2) 137
static masking 85
structured pruning 302
SuperGLUE benchmark 46, 87
supervised fine-tuning (SFT) 102, 264
support vector machines (SVMs) 8
surrogate model 289
Synthesizer 326

T
T0 107
Zero-Shot Text Generalization with 111, 112
TAble PArSing (TAPAS) 29

reference link 40
Tatoeba 340
t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor
Embedding (t-SNE) 202
TensorBoard 375
reference link 376
used, for tracking model training 376-379
TensorFlow 29
installing 35, 36
TensorFlow Extended (TFX) 359
used, for Faster Transformer
model serving 365-367
TensorFlow Hub 339
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) 299
Term Frequency - Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF) 201

multi-task learning with 106, 107
multi-task training with 107-111
text (TXT) 54
TF-IDF-based models 5

Index

TF-IDF BoW model
advantages and disadvantages 8
thought vector 6
time series data
concepts 414, 415
time series modeling 415-421
token classification 160, 161
used, for Question Answering (QA) 172-180
token embeddings 10
tokenization algorithms
working with 88-90
tokenizers
working with 37-39
tokenizers library 92
tokens 10
topic modeling 183
with BERTopic 203-205
traditional NLP approaches 7, 8
trained models
sharing, with community 80, 81
training argument definitions 129
transfer learning (TL) 4, 13, 44
using 22-24
transformer-based BERT embeddings 197
transformer models 14
transformer models directory
reference link 39
transformers 415-421
installing 35, 36
installing, with Anaconda 30
used, for image classification 392, 393
used, for object detection 393-396
used, for semantic segmentation
393, 396-398
using 22-24
Transformers’ decision
interpreting, with LIME 289-293
interpreting, with SHAP model 293-295

Transformer-XL 102, 105
translation language modeling (TLM) 330
Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) 228
Triplet network structure 186
TRL library 264-269

U
Ubuntu 31, 335
UNet 407
unidirectionality 102
Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP) 202, 341
unigram models 9
Universal Language Model Finetuning (ULMFiT) 6
Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) 183, 186
unstructured pruning 302
update gate 13
uvicorn 361

V
value 17
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs) 406
vector space models (VSMs) 7, 184
Vision Transformer (ViT) 24, 387-391
Visual Geometry Group (VGG) 22
visual prompt models 398-401
Visual Question Answering (VQA) 172
vocabulary symbols 91

W
W&B sweeps 384
WebText 104

433

434

Index

Weights & Biases (W&B) 375
used, for tracking model
training live 379-384
Wikipedia corpus 334
Windows
Anaconda, installing on 32-34
Winograd Natural Language
Inference (WNLI) 45
word2Vec 5, 185
word embeddings 5
word-level augmentation 215
word order
considering, with RNN models 10, 11
WordPiece model
training 96-98
WordPiece tokenization 10, 67, 91
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
URL 205

X
XGLUE benchmark 46
reference link 46
XLM-R 46
XLM-RoBERTa 199
XLM-R XL 354
XLM-R XXL 354
XLNet 102, 105
XNLI dataset 333-335
XTREME benchmark 46
reference link 46

Z
zero-shot cross-lingual transfer capability 46
zero-shot learning 101, 183
BART, using for 190-193
Zero Shot Learning for Text Classification
reference link 190
Zero-Shot Text Generalization
with T0 111, 112

packtpub.com
Subscribe to our online digital library for full access to over 7,000 books and videos, as well as
industry leading tools to help you plan your personal development and advance your career. For more
information, please visit our website.

Why subscribe?
• Spend less time learning and more time coding with practical eBooks and Videos from over
4,000 industry professionals
• Improve your learning with Skill Plans built especially for you
• Get a free eBook or video every month
• Fully searchable for easy access to vital information
• Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub files
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at packtpub.com and as a print book customer, you
are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at customercare@packtpub.
com for more details.
At www.packtpub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a range
of free newsletters, and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.

Other Books You May Enjoy
If you enjoyed this book, you may be interested in these other books by Packt:

Transformers for Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision
Denis Rothman
ISBN: 978-1-80512-872-4
• Learn how to pretrain and fine-tune LLMs
• Learn how to work with multiple platforms, such as Hugging Face, OpenAI, and Google Vertex AI
• Learn about different tokenizers and the best practices for preprocessing language data
• Implement Retrieval Augmented Generation and rules bases to mitigate hallucinations
• Visualize transformer model activity for deeper insights using BertViz, LIME, and SHAP
• Create and implement cross-platform chained models, such as HuggingGPT
• Go in-depth into vision transformers with CLIP, DALL-E 2, DALL-E 3, and GPT-4V

Other Books You May Enjoy

Mastering NLP from Foundations to LLMs
Lior Gazit, Meysam Ghaffari
ISBN: 978-1-80461-918-6
• Master the mathematical foundations of machine learning and NLP
• Implement advanced techniques for preprocessing text data and analysis Design ML-NLP
systems in Python
• Model and classify text using traditional machine learning and deep learning methods
• Understand the theory and design of LLMs and their implementation for various applications
in AI
• Explore NLP insights, trends, and expert opinions on its future direction and potential

437

438

Packt is searching for authors like you
If you’re interested in becoming an author for Packt, please visit authors.packtpub.com and
apply today. We have worked with thousands of developers and tech professionals, just like you, to
help them share their insight with the global tech community. You can make a general application,
apply for a specific hot topic that we are recruiting an author for, or submit your own idea.

Share Your Thoughts
Now you’ve finished Mastering Transformers, we’d love to hear your thoughts! If you purchased the
book from Amazon, please click here to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and
share your feedback or leave a review on the site that you purchased it from.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.

439

Download a free PDF copy of this book
Thanks for purchasing this book!
Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
books directly into your application.
The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
in your inbox daily
Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:
1.

Scan the QR code or visit the link below

https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781837633784
2.

Submit your proof of purchase

3.

That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly

